
* 9623394
* Mathematical Sciences: Finite Element Methods for Nonlinear PDE's and Adaptivity
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1996,06/21/1996
* Ricardo Nochetto,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/30/1999
* USD 70,000.00

9623394 Nochetto Problems governed by nonlinear partial differential equations
(PDEs) which exhibit sharp or diffuse, but rapid, transitions are of primary
importance in science and engineering. Liquid-solid phase transitions,
multicomponent alloys, anisotropy and junctions, epitaxial growth, multiphase
incompressible fluids, and advection dominated flows are relevant multiscale
examples considered in this project. The design, analysis and implementation of
innovative finite element methods which handle the presence of free boundaries,
thin layers and constraints, and the same time cope with possible numerical
pollution effects via adaptively refined meshes is central to this project. A
priori stability and error analyses, together with a posteriori error control
are quite delicate aspects of the proposed research that reveal the limited
value of linear theory in the context of strongly nonlinear PDEs. A posteriori
error estimates for degenerate parabolic PDEs must reflect the distinctive
presence of free boundaries and thin transition layers. Related PDE and
computational issues (implementation, recursive refinement/coarsening
algorithms, multilevel solvers) will also be investigated. This project is
expected to shed light on the efficient and reliable adaptive finite element
computation of phase transitions in materials science, and thus have impact on
high performance computing of phase transitions with surface tension effects.
Understanding and computing nonlinear evolutions of corrugations observed in
epitaxial growth is of fundamental importance in electronics and materials
science. Novel finite element methods will be designed and used to explore a
simple model for stress driven instabilities in solids. Validation of a taxis
model describing coexistence and interaction of several marine species in
response to foraging, predators and environmental conditions is crucial in
ecology and environmental sciences. Mixed finite element me thods will be used
in conjunction with exponential fitting to better exploit the structure of taxis
in the underlying system of nonlinear PDEs in both extremes of advection and
diffusion dominated flows.
