
* 9623060
* Mathematical Sciences: Analysis on Waves in Stratified Fluids of Infinite Depth
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1996,07/17/1996
* Shu-Ming Sun,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 54,420.00

9623060 Sun The purpose of this project is to present a mathematical and
numerical study of solitary and periodic waves in stratified fluids of infinite
depth subject to the gravitational force. The proposal consists of two parts.
The first part intends to give a rigorous answer to an open question whether
there exist solitary internal waves with algebraic decay at infinity in a
continuously stratified fluid that is bounded only by a rigid bottom and has a
constant density except for a layer with continuous density stratification. The
proposed research will give a rigorous justification of the existence of
solitary waves derived from a formal model equation, called the Benjamin-Ono
equation. The second part deals with the existence of periodic waves of large
amplitude in a two-layer fluid without boundaries. A new formulation of the
problem will be introduced, which transforms the governing equations into a
single integral equation. Then the solutions of the integral equation will be
studied numerically and theoretically for any density ratio without restrictions
on the amplitude of solutions. In this project, the main thrust is to show that
the fully nonlinear governing equations for stratified fluids have solutions of
finite and large amplitude and give the various properties of the solutions
using numerical and theoretical approaches. An interplay of theories in
differential equations and functional analysis will be essential to obtaining
the rigorous justifications, while numerical computation gives some crucial
information on the solutions. %%% The gravity waves of large amplitude in a
fluid of density variation, also called a stratified fluid, with great depth are
of considerable geophysical interest. Large amplitude internal wave disturbances
are common features in the oceans as well as in the lower atmosphere. In
particular, a solitary wave, whose form is a localized single hump, and a
periodic wave, which always has a same form after a certain distance, are
relevant to various oceanic and atmospherical phenomena. The solitary waves of
large amplitude have been associated with the formation of tornados in the
atmosphere and the enormous transport of momentum and energy within the oceans.
This work focuses on obtaining the conditions under which the solitary or
periodic waves can exist and predicting how large the amplitude of the waves can
be if they exist. It will also try to capture the qualitative features of these
waves using numerical computations. The results obtained from this research may
provide some theoretical explanation of the formation of these waves and give
more understanding of certain wave motions in the oceans and atmosphere so that
these waves may be either utilized or avoided in different physical
applications. ***
