
* 9623135
* Mathematical Sciences: Interior Point Methods for Convex Programming--Theory and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, OPERATIONS RESEARCH
* 06/01/1996,05/20/1996
* Osman Guler,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1999
* USD 64,000.00

9623135 Guler The object of this project is to develop algorithms for large
scale programming problems and to analyze their performance. The investigator
will continue his research in interior point methods in order to seek answers to
several theoretical and practical issues concerning these methods. Particular
issues include: (1) developing workable and near optimal barrier functions for
general convex problems, (2) using any special property a problem might have in
order to construct barrier functions with additional desirable properties, (3)
developing efficient long--step interior point methods by taking advantage of
the properties of the underlying problem and/or the barrier function, (4)
computational testing of the developed algorithms in order to gauge their
performance and gain additional insight into their behavior, and (5) developing
new tools to analyze interior point methods. Many problems in industry can be
formulated as large scale optimization problems. For example, many production,
scheduling (such as airline crew scheduling), planning problems, etc. can be
formulated as linear programs. The practical impact of interior point methods on
such large scale linear programs have been phenomenal. This has been followed by
similar successes in linear complementarity problems, and more recently in
semi-- definite programming. The latter problems also have practical
applications in industry, engineering, economics, and in many hard problems in
discrete optimization. (Some of these applications have been unexpected, and can
be attributed to the practical success of interior point methods.) Many other
industrial problems can be posed as convex programs. At present, interior point
methods provide the theoretical promise to solve such problems efficiently. The
investigator will perform research towards advancing interior point methods in
order to make this promise a reality. These advances will have a direct effect
on our a bility to solve important large scale industrial problems in
manufacturing, planning, transportation, distribution, and engineering.
