
* 9626179
* Mathematical Sciences: Innovative Finite Element Methods for Modeling Multiphase Contaminant Flows in Porous Media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1996,05/05/1998
* Richard Ewing,TX,Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/1999
* USD 116,500.00

9626179 Ewing The simulation of fluid flow in porous media related to
groundwater modeling, subsurface transport of contaminants, and petroleum
reservoir simulation requires the numerical approximation of large coupled
systems of nonlinear time-dependent partial differential equations. The
development of efficient numerical techniques for the large-scale simulation is
extremely important in understanding these porous media flows. Due to wave-like
or traveling front problems and highly localized natures in the coupled
differential systems and the enormous size of many reservoir simulation
problems, an important goal of efficient numerical modeling is the ability to
effectively model these effects and the utilization of new supercomputer
architectures. This project will concentrate on the development of finite
element methods, computational codes, and supporting mathematical analysis for
underground contamination flows. The numerical methods will be designed to
simulate such complex features of the flows as shock-line saturation fronts and
steep composition gradients, to produce accurate fluid velocities, to conserve
mass locally, and to take advantage of new parallel supercomputers. Self-
adaptive local grid- refinement methods and efficient implementation techniques
for iterative solution of large linear systems are also studied. A three-year
program of research is proposed into the development of accurate numerical
techniques, efficient computational codes, and supporting mathematical analysis
for modeling of multiphase flows and transport in groundwater hydrology which
has applications in design of remediation and cleanup technologies. The
development of improved methods for assessing groundwater contamination by
hazardous wastes has become increasingly important. Indeed, groundwater supplies
are increasingly threatened by organic, inorganic, and radioactive contaminants
introduced into the environment by improper disposal or acci dental release.
Estimates of remediation costs at U.S. government sites alone range into the
hundreds of billions of dollars. Protecting the quality of groundwater supplies
is a grand challenge problem of broad societal importance. There are also a
number of industrial applications of the proposed research. The production and
management of oil reservoirs are governed by equations and technologies that are
nearly identical to those exploited in groundwater hydrology. The manufacture of
high quality fiber reinforced plastic composites for automotive and aerospace
applications is controlled by technology similar to that studied in this
project. Design of semiconductors uses equations very analogous to those for
groundwater transport. In these areas, technology transfer can be easily carried
out: use of the codes developed for, industrial collaboration with the
researchers of, and employment of students trained on this project.
