
* 9626128
* Mathematical Analysis of Epidemiological Models of SEIRS Type with Varying Population Size
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1996,08/28/1996
* Michael Li,MS,Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2000
* USD 54,999.00

Li 9626128 The investigator studies a variety of new mathematical models in
epidemiology with the following three goals: (1). To build more realistic
models. (2). To search new mechanisms that can generate new epidemiological
phenomena. (3). To stimulate mathematical development of more effective tools
for model analysis. Many of the previously studied models are special cases of
the SEIRS type. On the one hand, a new analytical method developed by the
investigator and his collaborators makes rigorous mathematical analysis of the
SEIRS models with varying populations feasible and is a main tool in this
project. On the other, problems of mathematical interest arising from the model
analysis are thoroughly studied in a general mathematical setting. Computation
also plays a important role, complementing analytical methods and testing the
model using clinical or experimental data. The use of mathematical models to
describe the spread of an infectious disease in a human or animal population has
a long history. If the disease spreads through direct contact of individuals, a
susceptible individual first becomes infected through contact with an infectious
member; he then stays in the latent period before becoming infectious; after
this he recovers from the infection with temporary immunity and later becomes
susceptible again when the acquired immunity is lost. Death due to both natural
causes and infection may occur during the cycle. The population is divided into
four subclasses: susceptibles, exposed (those in the latent period), infectious,
and recovered, according to the four stages in the above cycle. An SEIRS model
for the spread of the infection is a system of ordinary differential equations
that describes how the number of individuals in each class changes with time and
how they interact, based on various assumptions on the way contacts between
individuals are made as well as on various environmental effects. Note that
every member of the p opulation is in one of these classes, so if the disease
causes death then the population size varies with time too. It is expected that
research on SEIRS epidemiological models with varying population size can
significantly advance our understanding of the transmission dynamics for many
diseases and our interpretation of complex clinical data, foster more accurate
predictions on the time course of the spread of an infection, and lead to more
effective disease prevention and control strategies. This is especially
significant today, given the alarming global resurgence of many infectious
diseases.
