
* 9700380
* A Strongly Coupled Analytical Study of the Interaction of Foreign Particles with a Solid-Liquid Interface in the Presence of Morphological and Fluid Instabilities
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/1997,04/01/1999
* Layachi Hadji,AL,University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/2001
* USD 111,000.00

Hadji 9700380 The objective of this project is to conduct an analytical study of
the interaction between a growing crystal interface and insoluble spherical
foreign particles. A directional solidification set-up is considered to study
the coupling between the distributions of temperature and concentrations, fluid
flow due to particle movement, convection, solute segregation, interfacial
deformations and particle presence near the moving interface. The mathematical
model, based on the conservation equations of energy, solute, mass and momentum,
is complemented by a set of appropriate boundary conditions. The resulting non-
dimensional system displays several dimensionless groupings, all of which have a
role in the subsequent analysis. This will predict the dominant crystal
morphology, stability criteria for interface shape, convection and density
advection effects and determine the threshold parameter values that separate
pushing and capture of particles. A weakly nonlinear bifurcation analysis will
be used to determine if the theoretical predictions can be verified
experimentally. The methodology requires the use of perturbation techniques,
asymptotic analysis, the bispherical coordinate system, bifurcation methods
appropriate to weakly nonlinear analysis, and some numerical methods. As we
approach the twenty-first century, scientists and technologists are under
increasing pressures to satisfy society's need for materials of lower weight and
higher reliability. For instance, in the aerospace industry, a reduced weight
facilitates an increased payload capacity in flight, operating cost savings,
higher speeds and longer range flights. However, lighter materials need to be
strengthened by the addition of tiny particles of a different substance. This in
turn complicates the manufacturing process. The final cast should have these
particles uniformly distributed but, in practical terms, this is difficult to
achieve. Imperfections arise due to the migration of the particles in the melt
during the solidification process, and are detrimental to the quality of the end
product. Some indications of how to overcome these difficulties have been
provided by experimental work. In view of the large number of processing and
physical variables, these partial solutions are unable to clearly relate the
processing history to the constitution of the cast. There remains the crucial
task of quantifying the influence of the various processing parameters on the
final cast, and this is the aim of our analytical work.
