
* 9700638
* Analysis and Characterization of Multi-Phase Systems with Application to Optimal Design
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1997,08/20/1997
* Robert Lipton,MA,Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 74,100.00

9700638 Lipton The analysis and optimal design of multi-phase systems is central
to the development of advanced materials for use in electronics, transportation
systems, and aerospace applications. From the perspective of human physiology it
is critical to understand transport phenomena in complex biological systems.
This project addresses areas where improved knowledge of transport properties
for multi-phase systems will have a large impact on technology. A significant
part of this project focuses on the behavior of composites with imperfectly
bonded components. Imperfect bonding between constituents is often the rule.
Imperfect bonds are frequently the result of damage to the structure incurred
during use. The first project treats the design of fiber reinforced materials in
the presence of imperfect bonding between the fiber and the matrix material. The
goal is to provide rigorous design rules for the optimal performance of
imperfectly bonded fiber reinforced structures. We consider next the
transmission of oscillating electric signals through structural materials
possessing imperfectly bonded constituents. We look for new mathematical methods
that will deliver structural information from the transmitted signal. These
methods will rely on the physics of the imperfect bond separating the
constituents. The third project treats the transport of ions in a biological
system. The goal is to understand the effect of cell geometry on the ionic
transport within living tissue. Last, the small geometries necessary for the
layout of very large scale integrated circuits incur high concentrations of the
electric field along conducting paths. These concentrations often result in the
failure of an electronic devise such as a microprocessor. The conducting paths
are often made from aluminum alloys of three or more materials. We seek the best
geometries among multi- phase conductors so as to minimize electric field
concentrations. The analysis and o ptimal design of multi-phase materials is
central to the development of advanced materials for use in electronics,
transportation systems, and aerospace structures. From the perspective of human
physiology it is critical to understand transport phenomena in complex
biological structures. This project addresses areas where improved knowledge of
transport properties for multi-phase structures will have impact on technology
and medicine. Fiber reinforced structures appear in many applications ranging
from golf clubs to the rotors on windmills. Over time the adhesion between the
fibers and the surrounding material is compromised by use. We investigate the
optimal design of such structures taking into account the imperfect adhesion
between fiber and surrounding material. Our goal is to design more durable
products that last longer than conventional fiber reinforced products. Next, we
investigate how to reduce the failure of microelectronic devices due to high
concentrations of electric current. The small geometries used in the layout of
integrated circuits require very narrow strips of metal to conduct electric
currents. These strips often fail because of the high volume of current that
they carry. The conducting strips are often made from a mixture of Aluminum,
Copper , and Silicon. We seek the best deployment of the Copper and Silicon in
the metal strip to prevent failure. Last, we attempt an improved
characterization of inter cellular ionic transport. From the stand point of
human physiology, an understanding of such transport for human brain cells may
offer early detection of the extent of damage caused by stroke.
