
* 9701967
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Coupling of Long Internal Waves with Small-Scale Disturbances
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, FD-Fluid Dynamics
* 09/01/1997,04/01/1999
* Triantaphyllos Akylas,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/2001
* USD 120,000.00

9701967 Akylas Internal gravity waves are of considerable geophysical interest:
large-amplitude internal wave disturbances frequently occur in the ocean
thermocline both in deep water and in coastal regions, as well as in the lower
atmosphere. This effort focuses on the dynamics of internal-wave groups,
particularly the coupling of the short-scale carrier oscillations with the
envelope of the group. This is a fully nonlinear mechanism that plays an
important part in the generation of gravity-capillary solitary waves on deep
water and in the radiation of oscillatory tails by nonlinear wave groups. The
main objective is to understand this coupling mechanism in the context of
stratified flows, both from a physical and a mathematical point of view. The
results of this research effort are expected to be useful in detecting and
controlling the propagation of nonlinear wave disturbances in various
applications. In the ocean environment, for instance, knowledge of internal-wave
activity is important in under-sea navigation and in the design of deep-water
offshore facilities. In the atmosphere, internal waves play an important part in
the initiation and organization of thunderstorm squall lines, the modulation of
rainfall and the dispersal of atmospheric pollutants. Nonlinear pulses are also
used in high-speed transmission of data in optical fibers and in optical
switching devices; understanding the propagation characteristics of nonlinear
pulses is essential to the transmission of noise-free signals over long
distances.
