
* 9703530
* Mathematical Sciences: Interface Dynamics and Renormalization Methods for Nonlinear Systems of Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, CONDENSED MATTER & MAT THEORY
* 06/15/1997,06/02/1998
* Gunduz Caginalp,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/2000
* USD 92,454.00

9703530 Caginalp This proposal is being jointly funded by Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) and Division of Materials Research (DMR). This
proposal involves research on two topics: (a) the study of interfaces, and (b)
the use of renormalization and scaling methods to study systems of parabolic
differential equations. The study of interfaces proceeds along the lines of
previous work that utilizes the phase field model. The study of alloys is
particularly important in terms of the ''freezing in'' of solute into the solid.
This is an area in which mathematics can make a substantial contribution since
the models necessarily involve differential equations that are degenerate, as
the diffusivity is close to zero in the solid phase. In the second part of the
study, the PI will utilize renormalization and scaling methods to obtaing
results on systems of parabolic differential equations in which an asymptotic
self-similarity can be expected. The work involves an extension of the PI's work
that used these methods to compute anomalous exponents in nonlinear diffusion
equations. The objective is to extend these results to systems of parabolic
differential equations, thereby adding a powerful tool to the methodology of
these systems. Finally, the study will apply these methods to reaction-diffusion
systems such as the phase field equations in order to extract key features of
global behavior. This study will provide a formalism for studying complicated
problems involving materials science. In particular, interface problems arise in
many industrial applications and pose important challenges in terms of theory
and large scale computation. The development of a consistent set of equations
and methodology for high speed computation is valuable as a starting point for
many industrial applications such as casting of alloys. The study will also
utilize renormalization techniques that have been so successful in understanding
subtle behavior in thermodynamics. With the development of these techniques in
this dynamical context, an extremely complicated engineering problem can
potentially be understood in terms of manageable parts with particular
characteristic behavior.
