
* 9703630
* Pattern Formation in Semi-Discrete Excitable Media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1997,09/15/1997
* Stuart Hastings,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 60,000.00

Hastings 9703630 Semi-discrete models of excitable media consist of coupled
systems of ordinary differential equations, with each unit describing the
electrical kinetics in a single "cell". They are intermediate between continuous
(pde) models and purely discrete models, or cellular automata. The investigator
studies whether principles developed for cellular automata models apply to the
more realistic semi-discrete case. He considers specific models developed from
experimental data to give quantitative descriptions of neural behavior. A model
of special interest is that of Morris and Lecar, describing voltage oscillations
in barnacle muscle fiber. This model has different features from the well-known
FitzHugh-Nagumo system, features that are found in a number of experimental
settings and that, moreover, appear amenable to mathematical analysis. The
investigator explores the role of various parameters in the system in the
propagation of spatial patterns. Among the factors to be considered are
excitation threshold, coupling strength, relative rates of fast and slow
processes, spatial geometry of the medium, and the relative time spent in the
excited and refractory states. The goal of this project is to develop an
understanding of pattern formation in semi-discrete excitable media. The main
intended application is to neurobiology, though excitable media are found in
many biological and chemical systems. Isolated cells are called ``excitable'' if
they exhibit a threshold phenomenon in response to a brief external stimulus,
but cannot support continued oscillations on their own. A semi-discrete model
describes collections of excitable neurons coupled by a linear or nonlinear
diffusion mechanism. Examples include nerve, cardiac, and muscle tissue,
supporting phenomena such as wave propagation down a myelinated axon, waves of
electrical stimulation that sweep through heart muscles, and spreading cortical
depression, a brain wave phenomenon.
