
* 9703716
* Evolution Equations in Modeling Chemically Reacting Flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1997,03/03/1999
* Moshe Matalon,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/2000
* USD 126,000.00

Matalon 9703716 The objectives of the proposed work is to derive and analyze
simple mathematical models of reacting flow systems by means of asymptotic and
perturbation methods supplemented by numerical computations. The problems that
will be addressed are related to phenomena that have been observed
experimentally and are not yet completely understood. They fall in two
categories: the first class of problems is concerned with premixed flames
propagating in tubes, while the second class is concerned with diffusion flames
(non-premixed combustion) that result from evaporating liquid fuels. The
mathematical formulation of these problems can be reduced to a single, or a
couple, of evolution equations that contain the main ingredients of the physical
problem and are to be solved numerically. For premixed flames propagating in
tubes the evolution equation takes the form of an integro-differential equation
that describes the instantaneous shape and location of the flame front. For the
burning of liquid films one finds, in general, two equations: one for the
dynamics of the interface between the liquid and gas phases, and the other for
the diffusion flame sheet which is the interface where the fuel vapor burns with
the ambient oxidant. Combustion processes are extremely complicated; they
encompass subjects concerned with energy generation and heat transfer, rates and
mechanisms of chemical reactions, fluid flow and mass transport. They cover a
broad range of important engineering technologies as well as topics of primary
societal and environmental concerns. A fundamental way to gain understanding
into the complex phenomena that one observe in various combustion systems is
through mathematical modeling. This approach enables one to identify the
underlying physical mechanisms responsible for the observed phenomenon, to study
the interaction between the various physical parameters and to explore whether
this interaction leads to the observed behavior. A deep understandin g often
leadq to suggestions of new directions for experiments and design. The problems
in this study are concerned with premixed flames, relevant to internal
combustion engines and aerospace propulsion systems where the fuel and oxidant
are intimately mixed prior to ignition, and combustion of liquid fuels, relevant
to accidental spillage and fire spread where, under special circumstances,
burning may occur with the available ambient oxidant.
