
* 9703727
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlocal Equations Modeling Fine- scale Structures in Solids
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1997,06/26/1997
* Xiaofeng Ren,UT,Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/2000
* USD 63,409.00

Ren 9703727 Martensite transformations are phase transformations that produce a
change of shape and a change of crystal symmetry. Shape-memory materials are
materials that are extremely malleable in the martensite phase below a
transformation temperature, but that return to a `remembered' original shape
when heated above the transformation temperature. Coherent phase transitions of
crystalline solids lead to mixtures of distinct phases or phase variants with
characteristic fine-scale structures. The main issues addressed in this project
are the characteristic scales, the generation and the propagation of the
microstructures. A nonlocal theory involving integro-differential evolutionary
equations is proposed to answer these questions. This theory lies between the
traditional microscopic quantum theory which uses Schodinger's equation and the
macroscopic elasticity theory which uses elliptic and hyperbolic partial
differential equations. In the study of the characteristic scales, a periodic
solution of a stationary nonlocal equation is needed. But the equation seems to
have multiple solutions. The `right' periodic solution should be selected by a
suitable least energy principle. Another intriguing question is to find a
`generalized' traveling wave solution of a dynamic nonlocal equation, which
describes the propagation of microstructures. This solution should have an
oscillatory structure at one end, constant value at the other end, and as time
increases the uniform-to-oscillatory transition region should advance in a
periodic manner. Such a solution can also be viewed as a heteroclinic orbit in
an infinitely dimensional function space connecting a periodic stationary
solution to a constant stationary solution. Materials and processing are
critical to the success of industries such as the aerospace, automotive,
biomaterials, chemical, electronics, energy, metals, and telecommunications
industries. This project is concerned with shape memory materials and martensite
transformations. The mathematical theory in this project is aimed at
understanding the characteristic scales, the generation and the propagation of
the microstructures during shape memory materials' phase transformations. The
study of stationary periodic solutions ald uniform-to-oscillatory waves of the
integro-differential evolutionary equations used in this nonlocal mathematical
theory is at the cutting edge of mathematical analysis and computation.
