
* 9704980
* Dynamics, Patterns and Symmetry
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1997,08/14/1998
* Martin Golubitsky,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 300,018.00

9704980 Golubitsky Bifurcations to spiral waves and to cellular patterns in
partial differential equations posed on a circular disk will be investigated. In
unbounded domains, the bifurcation and meandering of spirals and scroll waves
and the Ginzburg-Landau theory of spatially extended systems will be considered
-- - with application to spatially aperiodic solutions in spatially extended
systems. In addition, part of the effort will be devoted to studying the
dynamics present in ordinary differential equations with symmetry. Stable
ergodicity of chaotic attractors in problems with continuous symmetry, and the
existence, stability and bifurcations of robust heteroclinic cycles will be
studied. Some of these ideas are relevant to intermittent magnetic dynamos in
rotating convection. Patterns appear in physical, chemical, and biological
systems and are characteristically striking and reproducible. Consequently,
scientists and mathematicians have developed theories to explain the origins of
these patterns. There are several approaches to the study of pattern; this one
is based on symmetry and bifurcation. It is proposed to investigate the theory
and application of symmetric dynamical systems and its relation to pattern
formation. There are fundamental differences in the analyses depending on
whether the patterns being studied fit neatly into a bounded domain or whether
boundaries are unimportant and the equations are posed on infinite domains.
Aspects of both cases will be studied.
