
* 9704203
* Subdifferentials and Their Applications to Control Theory
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/1997,06/06/1997
* Qiji Zhu,MI,Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/2000
* USD 64,754.00

9704203 Zhu The main goals of this project are to investigate several important
areas of mathematical control theory in which nonsmoothness is intrinsic to the
problem and the usual assumptions of Lipschitz continuity or continuity must be
replaced by assumptions of lower semicontinuity even if the original problem is
defined by continuous or even smooth data. As an important tool for such
investigations, it is also proposed to further develop a basic theory and a
calculus of subdifferentials. The control problems that are intended to be
investigated by these methods include: (1) Controllability properties of
unbounded control and differential inclusion systems; (2) Bilevel optimization
problems; (3) Infinite horizon problems with both initial-value and natural
system perturbations; (4) Necessary optimality conditions for distributed
control problems starting with those defined by quasilinear elliptic partial
differential equations; (5) Value function and sensitivity analysis for delayed
control problems; and (6) Dynamical programming approach to control problems
with discrete stochastic variables. The control problems proposed above
naturally arise in resource management, flexible manufacturing system
scheduling, transportation scheduling and other industry and management
problems. These control problems have been studied with simplified models in
which the system performance is assumed to be free of abrupt changes. However,
in real life problems such abrupt changes are not only unavoidable but rather
often among the most important features of the problem. The discontinuous
aspects of these problems will be studied with recent methods of the
subdifferential theory. New methods will also be developed as needed. Research
results in this project are likely to shed light on other applications that
involve similar discontinuous behaviors.
