
* 9704759
* Theoretical Chemistry, Dynamical Systems, and the Geometry of Global Phase Space Dynamics
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
* 08/01/1997,08/28/2000
* Stephen Wiggins,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 01/31/2001
* USD 195,000.00

9704759 Wiggins This research project is concerned with developing analytical
and computational tools for studying the global dynamics of semiclassical models
of molecules. The emphasis will be on molecular models with three or more
degrees-of-freedom and the analytical approach is that of the geometric theory
of nonlinear dynamical systems. In particular, we will investigate how
geometrical structures in phase space are manifested in experimental spectra,
the local to normal mode transition in molecules with three or more degrees-of-
freedom, energy transport and the role of invariant manifolds in determining
this, and the dynamics of rotational-vibrational interaction in molecules with
three or more degrees-of-freedom. In addition, we will investigate mechanism for
global instabilities in Hamiltonian systems with three or more degrees of
freedom; in particular, the Arnold mechanism. The research is concerned with the
development of techniques to study classical and semiclassical dynamics of
molecules with three or more degrees-of-freedom, as well as a fundamental study
of mechanisms for instability in Hamiltonian systems with three or more degrees-
of-freedom. Over the past 10 years experimental techniques have been developed
in chemistry to the point where real time dynamical data related to molecular
interactions and dynamics can be obtained, which has resulted in the area of
research known as "femtochemistry". In some ways the experimental situation in
chemistry today bears a strong resemblance to the experimental situation in
fluid mechanics in the late 1970`s. At that time new laser based experimental
techniques were developed that resulted in global, real time dynamical data from
fluid flows. Such data played a key role in the dynamical systems analyses of
fluid flows. In fact, one could make the case that these experimental advances
were the reason that fluid mechanics became (probably) the main application area
for dynamical sy stems theory throughout the 1980`s. Today we are in an
analogous situation for theoretical chemistry vis- -vis the relation of
experimental advances in fluid mechanics and dynamical systems theory in the
late 1970`s. Consequently, a focused, interdisciplinary research effort in
dynamical systems and theoretical chemistry could play an important role in the
interpretation of this new experimental data, as well as the further development
of the field of theoretical chemistry. This award will be supported by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences, the Division of Chemistry, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.
