
* 9704622
* Mathematical Sciences: Instabilities and Bifurcations in Non-Newtonian Shear Flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1997
* David Olagunju,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 12/31/2000
* USD 80,000.00

PI: David O. Olagunju Proposal DMS-9704622 INSTABILITIES AND BIFURCATIONS IN
NON-NEWTONIAN SHEAR FLOWS ABSTRACT In this project we shall undertake the
analysis of instabilities and bifurcations in flows of non-Newtonian (or
viscoelastic) fluids. Particular emphasis will be paid to three dimensional
shear flows. Among the issues that will be investigated are: (a) the
mechanism(s) that cause instabilities in viscoelastic flows (b) what rheological
and hydrodynamical factors are responsible for the instabilities and (c) the
nature of bifurcations that occur once instability has set in. Of great interest
will be to asses the role of rheological factors such as first and second normal
stress differences, and shear thinning in the onset and development of
instabilities. The importance of hydrodynamical and geometrical factors like
inertia, surface tension and aspect ratios will also be investigated. To this
end we shall consider shear flows in different geometries and will employ a
number of different constitutive models such as the Oldroyd--B, Phan--Thien
Tanner, Johnson Segalman and the Giesekus models. The results of our analysis
will be compared with available experimental results. In addition to providing
qualitative as well as quantitative results on instabilities and bifurcations
our results will also provide valuable information on how well different
constitutive models describe not only simple shear flows but complex flows as
well. Non--Newtonian (or viscoelastic) fluids which are the subject of this
project include materials used in a wide ranging number of industrial and
scientific applications. Examples are polymers (used in the plastic industry),
paints, industrial inks, suspensions, emulsions and biological fluids. The
nature and behavior of these fluids can be radically different from ordinary
fluids such as water (Newtonian fluids) with which we are much more familiar.
During industrial processing and scientific experiments thes e fluids are
subjected to shearing motions. For example in order to determine the properties
of new materials they are placed in instruments called rheometers and sheared.
Data obtained from the subsequent motion are then used in determining the
relevant material properties. It is known from applications and experiments that
when viscoelastic fluids undergo shearing the nature of the flow may change
drastically in ways that may lead to unpredictable results. These drastic
changes are termed instabilities. Because these instabilities can have
undesirable as well as unexpected consequences during industrial processing with
great economic implications, it is important for us to understand the factors
that cause and sustain them. Such an understanding will provide a means of
predicting when such instabilities will occur and what the effect will be on the
flow when they occur. This will enable us to set parameters during experiments
and industrial processing so that instabilities can be prevented. In this
project we will try to provide answers to these and other related issues by
studying and analyzing mathematical equations that describe the flow of
viscoelastic fluids. This work will be an important contribution to the Federal
Government's strategic initiatives in the areas of materials and manufacturing.
