
* 9704632
* Geophysical Models: Regularity, Justification and Long-time Behavior
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1997,09/05/1997
* Edriss Titi,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2001
* USD 88,000.00

Titi 9704632 The investigator and his colleague study the validity of
approximations to complex geophysical fluid problems. The basic problem faced in
geophysical fluid dynamics is that a mathematical description based only on
fundamental physical principles, which will be called the ``Primitive
Equations,'' is often prohibitively expensive computationally, and hard to study
analytically. More manageable approximate models, which should represent the
behavior of the physical system on time and length scales of interest, are
therefore used for making predictions about the real world. Naturally, the
question of validity of such simpler models arises. The first theme of this
project is the justification of two prototypical models of shallow water, called
the "Lake" and the "Great Lake" equations, which describe the long-time motion
of an inviscid, incompressible fluid contained in a shallow basin with a slowly
spatially varying bottom, a free upper surface and vertical side walls, under
the influence of gravity and in the limit of small characteristic velocities and
very small surface amplitude. It is expected that the shallow water
approximation can be justified only for limited intervals of time, the length of
which can be estimated. In order to validate the long time behavior of fluid
dynamical models, one has to compare the statistical properties of their
attracting invariant sets, rather than compare individual solutions. To do so,
it is necessary to focus on models that include some mechanism of dissipation.
The second theme of this project concerns damping as a possible ``smoothing''
mechanism---a mechanism that is weaker than the viscosity normally considered.
Technically, the question is whether linear damping is sufficient to assert
existence of a smooth or even analytic global attractor. This is first
investigated for the nonlinear Schrodinger equation. Although not a geophysical
model, it is an important prototype for which partial result s are already
available. Next, the Stommel-Charney model for the Gulf stream is considered,
where the Coriolis force is expected to play an important role as a second
regularization mechanism. Lastly, a model for Benard convection in a porous
medium is investigated. Here the temperature is diffusive while the fluid
velocity is only linearly damped. Computer predictions of phenomena on large or
global scales, for example weather or climate forecasts, need to compromise
between accuracy of the predictions and available computing resources. It is
therefore a major scientific concern to devise approximation schemes and models
that are efficient as well as trustworthy. The first aspect of this project
concerns the validity of models of shallow water. Oceans, for example, are
shallow in the sense that they are much wider than they are deep. The
shallowness is one of the features that are usually exploited to obtain less
complex models. The project aims at the justification of this procedure in the
context of two examples that are simple enough to allow detailed study, and yet
contain most of the difficulties found in more generic situations. The second
aspect of the project concerns the long time behavior of models in the presence
of weak damping. When a physical system is modeled for long periods of time, the
balance of energy input (``driving'') and energy loss (``damping'') becomes very
important. The project focuses on a particular mathematical manifestation of
damping, the so-called weak damping, and in particular on how it influences the
model for large times.
