
* 9704911
* Nonlinear Dynamic Forecasting for Signal Processing Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1997,06/26/1997
* Kevin Short,NH,University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2001
* USD 70,594.00

9704911 Short This project will attempt to develop signal processing techniques
based on nonlinear dynamic (NLD) forecasting. Traditional signal processing
approaches have generally relied upon the assumption that systems are either
periodic/quasi-periodic or random. The NLD forecasting approach attempts to
bridge the gap between these approaches by assuming that there may be a
deterministic component which is responsible for the observed complex behavior.
Prior work on a test case has shown that it is possible to use NLD forecasting
to predict seismic background noise sufficiently well that it is possible to
reduce the noise by over an order of magnitude, making it possible to see hidden
teleseismic events. In other applications, NLD forecasting has been used to
unmask secure chaotic communication schemes by predicting the dynamics of the
chaotic carrier with sufficient accuracy that the hidden messages may be
extracted. The proposed research will expand the use of multi-step forecasting
methods so that predictions can be made for longer times, and so that signal
extraction may be improved. Resumming techniques will also be studied, where a
series of short-term predictions will be used to rebuild the hidden signals.
Seismic data from various sites will be examined to explore the limits of
predictability, and an attempt will be made to develop real-time processing
techniques which will aid in monitoring of nuclear treaties. The link between
spectral signal processing methods and NLD processing will be studied so that
the tools can be used in a complementary and integrated manner. Curvature-based
methods of NLD processing will be developed for time series where it is
difficult to get a nice phase space reconstruction. NLD forecasting will be used
to create statistical ensembles which can then be considered from a statistical
processing perspective. Success in these research areas will represent
significant progress in the developme nt of NLD signal processing as an
important new technology. This project will attempt to develop a new signal
processing technology based on nonlinear dynamic (NLD) forecasting. Traditional
signal processing approaches have generally relied upon the assumption that
systems are either periodic or random. NLD signal processing recognizes that
many systems which appear to be random may be produced by processes which are
inherently predictable, at least in the short-term. In fact, it is the ability
to make accurate short-term predictions which distinguishes nonlinear dynamic
systems (also known as chaotic systems) from typical random systems. These NLD
prediction techniques have already been used on a test case of seismic
background noise provided by the Air Force Technical Applications Center
(AFTAC), where it was shown that the background noise could be predicted so well
that after the predicted background was removed, one could clearly see the
presence of hidden signals which were essentially equivalent to distant nuclear
test detonations. In another application, NLD prediction techniques have been
used to extract hidden messages from chaotic communication systems, where the
predictions about the behavior of the chaotic carrier signal were so accurate
that when they were removed, the hidden message signal could be observed. The
proposed research will expand these NLD forecasting methods to improve the
extraction of signals from noisy environments. The seismic problem will be
examined using various data sources to determine the limits of predictability,
and a parallel processing implementation will be used to attempt to develop a
real-time processing system which may be useful for monitoring of nuclear
treaties. Further research will examine the connection between NLD techniques
and traditional signal processing techniques. Success in these research areas
will represent significant progress in the development of NLD signal processing
as an important new technology.
