
* 9704285
* Nonclassical PDO and Some Practical Problems of Local Tomography
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1997,06/18/1997
* Alexander Katsevich,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 07/31/2001
* USD 63,000.00

Alexander Katsevich ABSTRACT Theory of pseudo-differential operators (PDO) is a
powerful tool which has been successfully used in diverse areas of mathematics
and, in particular, in tomography. In the classical theory, PDOs are assumed to
have infinitely differentiable symbols. Although this is frequently the case,
the assumption about smoothness is very restrictive and does not allow one to
address important practical problems. Two cases where this assumption is
especially restrictive are as follows: limited-angle local tomography and Single
Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) with nonsmooth attenuation. Here one
is interested in recovery of the wave front of a distribution knowing only the
result of applying a PDO with nonsmooth symbol to that distribution. Known
results on PDOs, symbols of which have limited smoothness, do not apply because
of specific nature of the singularities of the occurring symbols. Main
objectives of the proposed research are as follows (1) To develop a theory of
certain classes of PDOs with nonsmooth symbols which occur in tomography; (2) To
develop algorithms for analysis of the limited-angle tomographic data and SPECT
data when the attenuation coefficient is not smooth. In the case of the limited-
angle data, our goal is to be able to recover as much of the visible
singularities with minimal distortions as possible. This is especially important
for the singularities which are located close to the boundary of the visibility
range. In the case of SPECT, our goal is to demonstrate that local tomography
can be used in the case of nonsmooth attenuation; and (3) To test the algorithms
on numerical experiments. Significance of the proposed research is twofold.
First, the expected results will advance our understanding of how PDOs with
nonsmooth symbols transform wave fronts of distributions. Second, the expected
results will help solve important practical problems. SPECT is a popular tool
for noninvasive medical imaging. It is used in cerebral, cardiac, and other
kinds of medical imaging. SPECT is based on reconstructing distribution of
radionuclides inside a patient knowing counts of photons emitted from the
patient along different directions on a plane. Depending on what kind of the
radiopharmaceutical is used, the distribution provides different types of
medical information about the patient. The main difficulty in analyzing the
SPECT data comes from the fact that, in general, the photons emitted inside a
patient are attenuated in a complicated, nonuniform manner. In this case, no
inversion formula is known. Therefore, even though the photons are attenuated
nonuniformly inside the patient, practically all current algorithms must assume
that the attenuation coefficient is either zero or a constant. This results in
attenuation artifacts, which remain a significant obstacle in the analysis of
SPECT images. Even most recent approaches, that are based on the idea of local
tomography and take into account variable attenuation, fail to consider the case
of nonsmooth attenuation. Our results will provide for more accurate
quantitation of SPECT images even when the attenuation coefficient varies from
point to point and has discontinuities. It appears that our study will be the
first to investigate theoretically effects of discontinuous attenuation on SPECT
images. Research related to limited-angle local tomography is of importance in
applications involving nondestructive evaluation of big pieces of equipment,
where a scanning device cannot be rotated 360 degrees around the object.
Examples are scanning of exit cones of rockets located on a gantry, jet engines,
turbines, etc.
