
* 9704976
* Numerical Capturing of Multiscale Solutions in Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1997,08/05/1997
* Thomas Hou,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 07/31/2001
* USD 145,500.00

Numerical Capturing of Multiscale Solutions in PDEs Thomas Y. Hou Applied Math
Caltech Abstract of Proposed Research We propose developing a new finite element
method of computing multiscale and multicomponent problems in composite
materials and porous media. In this method, the base functions are constructed
in such a way that they contain the local microscopic properties of the
differential operators. These oscillatory bases are independent from each other
and can be constructed independently. In effect, we break a large scale
computation into many smaller and independent pieces, which can be carried out
perfectly in parallel. Thus, the size of the computation is drastically reduced.
Due to this drastic memory saving, numerical computations of practical problems
with many small scales, which were previously unobtainable using a traditional
finite element method, now become possible using our method. An advantage of our
approach is that it can handle general multiscale problems without the
requirement of scale separation, a property which is very important for
practical applications. Several numerical examples are included to demonstrate
this effect. We will perform a careful numerical error analysis of our method.
The effect of grid resonance, and geometric singularities of local inclusions,
such as corners, cusps, will be analyzed. Effective numerical simulations of
multiscale phenomena play an essential role in many engineering and industrial
applications. A direct numerical solution of the multiple scale problems is
difficult even with modern supercomputers. The major difficulty of direct
solutions is the scale of computation. For oil reservoir simulations, it is
common that millions of grid blocks are involved, with each block having a
dimension of tens of meters, whereas the permeability measured from cores is at
a scale of several centimeters. This gives more th an hundred thousands of
degrees of freedom per spatial dimension in the computation. Therefore, a
tremendous amount of computer memory and CPU time are required, and they can
easily exceed the limit of today's computing resources. The goal of this
proposed research is to provide a coarsened reservoir model which gives
simulation results in close agreement with those of the original fine scale
description but at considerable computational savings. Many existing up-scaling
methods currently used in the oil industry are based on the homogenization
theory with periodic structures and separable scales. There is no guarantee that
they work for general random permeability without scale separation. In
comparison, our approach is more systematic and general. We are very hopeful
that this proposed research will provide an effective alternative to perform oil
reservoir simulations.
