
* 9704762
* Waves and Particles: Nonlinear Microlocal Analysis of Microstructures in Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1997,06/09/1997
* Luc Tartar,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9704762 TARTAR As part of a much larger project, the Principal Investigator
plans to develop variants of the tool of H-measures that he has introduced a few
years ago under NSF grants. One question concerns variants able to observe large
domains of frequency, as is supposed to occur in turbulence. Another question
concerns parabolic effects, which require a variant using different scalings in
different directions. Another question concerns the taking into account of
oscillating initial data in studying the propagation of oscillations and
concentration effects for general hyperbolic systems with variable coefficients,
a particular emphasis being put on questions of Elasticity in connection with
seismic problems. Another question concerns the effects of limited regularity of
coefficients or interaction with the boundaries, reflection, refraction, grazing
rays. The Principal Investigator also plans to study which constitutive
relations in Elasticity are admissible under the necessity of having the finite
propagation speed property for mixtures. The Principal Investigator has
developed under NSF grants a new approach to general questions of Continuum
Mechanics and Physics, which corresponds to explaining how waves can appear to
behave like particles. The repercussions of having now such a new rigourous
mathematical framework will be enormous in many different areas, but at the
moment the developments are still of a very technical nature, and apart from
problems related to Elasticity which are connected to seismic problems, the work
of the Principal Investigator during the coming year will be mostly theoretical,
opening new directions for future research and applications.
