
* 9704383
* Mathematical Problems Related to Materials Science
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1997,07/29/1997
* Harumi Hattori,WV,West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2000
* USD 52,962.00

Hattori 9704383 We discuss the three subjects that are related to materials
science. They are the phase transition problem, magnetostriction, and
hydrodynamic models of semiconductors. The phase transition problems are a
fundamental problem in physics and an important research area in engineering.
Some of the materials undergoing the phase transition are called ``smart
materials.'' Typical examples are shape memory alloys. In the phase transition
problem we examine the compatibility of the entropy rate admissibility criterion
and the entropy condition. Then, we discuss the existence of global weak
solutions and numerical analysis. We need a careful analysis of the interaction
between phase boundary and elementary waves (shock waves and rarefaction waves).
I believe that this research will bring a better understanding of the phase
transitions. The magnetostriction is the combination of wave equations for
elasticity and the Landau-Lifshitz equations for the magnetic moment. We can
regard them as nonlinear wave equations with rate equations, where the rate
equations have a special structure. This gives an interesting dynamics. We
consider the traveling wave solutions, the smooth and weak solutions, numerical
analysis, and etc. We also consider the Ericksen bar. Some magnetic materials
undergo phase transition. This research may bring an insight to it. Also, this
research may be useful to study the hysteretic behavior observed in some
magnetic materials. The semiconductors are important materials or devices in
industry. Recently, the hydrodynamic models are becoming more popular. The
equations we discuss consist of the hydrodynamic equations for electrons and the
Poisson equation for the electrostatic potential. We consider mainly the
stability of steady state solutions. The stability issue is an important subject
especially when there are multiple steady state solutions. I study mathematical
aspects of materials science. One goal is to have better understanding of t he
phase transitions. In phase transition problems we discuss the change of various
properties of materials due to change in factors such as temperature. A typical
example is water which changes to vapor or ice depending on temperature. The
phase transitions take place in magnetic materials too. The phase transitions in
magnetic materials are used for various switching devices or recording devices.
A very good example of magnetic material is a videorecording tape. It is
important to understand the mechanisms of phase transitions so that we can
construct better devices. In some such materials, it is important to consider
both elastic and magnetic effects as both influence the ways in which the phase
transitions occurs. By elastic effects we mean the effects associated with
compressing or pulling the material. There are mathematical models describing
the phase transitions. I plan to study how various effects such as above
influence each other. I would like to study these mathematical models
analytically as well as numerically. I also study hydrodynamic models of
semiconductors. In these types of models we regard the electric current as
``fluid'' and study how this ``fluid'' flows in semiconductors. Semiconductors
are used in PCs and other electric devices. To study how the electric current
runs in the semiconductors is very important and interesting. There are a few
hydrodynamic models depending on what kind of effects one wants to consider. An
important effect that has not been considered is temperature. I would like to
consider such effects.
