
* 9704615
* Instabilities, Modes, and Bifurcations of Orbits in Stellar Systems
* DMS,EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1997,03/03/1999
* Christopher Hunter,FL,Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 127,217.00

9704615 Hunter The principal investigator is proposing to investigate two
classes of phenomena that are relevant to the dynamics of galaxies. One is that
of instabilities and modes, and the other is that of bifurcations of orbits. The
work is analytical and is based on the approximation that galaxies are
collisionless stellar systems. That approximation is based on the belief that
most of the mass of galaxies is in the form of stars and dark matter, which
move, without mutual collisions, on orbits whose form is determined by the total
gravity field of the galaxy. N-body simulations of galaxies have shown that both
instabilities and large-scale modes of oscillation do occur, and that their
occurrence depends on the orbital population of the galaxy. Modes occur when all
the orbits pulsate in a coherent manner, while instability occurs when the
collective response of the orbital population to a disturbance is to reinforce
it and make it grow. The principal investigator will seek detailed descriptions
of these possibilities to help explain the underlying dynamics. He has developed
a new technique for the accurate location and tracking of modes and
instabilities. The bifurcations to be investigated are those at which the form
and stability of orbits change. The nature of the orbits is crucial to the
structure of a galaxy. Though the two classes of phenomena are to be
investigated separately, they are likely interrelated. Galaxies are of interest
because they are the fundamental building blocks of the Universe. A typical
galaxy is composed of hundreds of billions of stars, each of which moves on its
own individual orbit according to well-known physical laws of dynamics. The
primary interest of the principal investigator is in the stability of such
systems, and a secondary interest is in the nature of the orbits and the ways in
which they can change. One determines whether or not a system is stable by
studying how it responds when it is pertur bed. The response may be a mode in
which all the orbits manage to pulsate regularly in unison. Alternatively,
disturbances dissipate and decay when there is stability, or reinforce and grow
when there is instability. Each type of behavior has been observed in computer
experiments. What this work seeks is theoretical understanding of underlying
causes. It will be carried out using mathematical models, which are of necessity
statistical because of the large number of stars to be represented, and a
combination of mathematical analysis and computation. Galaxies are known to have
existed over a large fraction of the age of the Universe, and hence should be
free of all but the mildest instabilities. Hence any findings concerning the
requirements for stability is in principle testable against observations of the
present day dynamical structure of galaxies.
