
* 9705670
* Nonlinear Dynamics and Pattern Formation in Combustion
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, CFS-Combustion & Fire Systems
* 07/01/1997,06/03/1999
* Bernard Matkowsky,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/30/2000
* USD 171,600.00

Matkowsky 9705670 We pursue a research program in nonlinear dynamics and pattern
formation in combustion. The program involves a synergism of analytical and
numerical studies of problems in combustion and flame propagation, which has
been successful in elucidating solution behavior of the highly nonlinear systems
of PDEs which we study. In particular, interest centers on problems exhibiting
complex spatiotemporal dynamics in gaseous combustion as well as in solid fuel
combustion. In gaseous combustion, we consider four different problem areas: (a)
flames with sequential reactions, (b) flames in stretched flows, (c) flames
stabilized on a burner, and (d) flames in gas filled tubes. We also consider
problems in solid fuel combustion, in which combustion waves are used to
synthesize advanced materials. In this relatively new and innovative
technological process, which appears to enjoy many advantages over conventional
technology, the combustion wave propagates through the sample, converting
unreacted solid powder mixture to solid product. Our analytical studies are
based on bifurcation and nonlinear stability theories, which employ asymptotic
analysis and singular perturbation theory in the neighborhood of bifurcation or
other transition points, resulting in a local description of the solution in a
neighborhood of the appropriate critical point. Then an adaptive pseudo-spectral
method, developed by the proposer and A. Bayliss, is employed for large scale
scientific computations, with which the local description is globally extended.
The solutions of the problems considered exhibit layer type behavior, i.e.,
localized regions in which the solution varies very rapidly. It is a challenge
to numerical methods to accurately and efficiently resolve such behavior. The
adaptive pseudo-spectral method has been shown to successfully meet this
challenge. As critical parameters of the problem are exceeded, transitions to
states with successively greater degrees of spatio-temporal complexity occur.
Our goal is to describe the transitions as well as the resulting spatio-temporal
patterns. The analytical studies, in addition to elucidating system behavior,
e.g., parameter dependencies, also serve as benchmarks for the ensuing numerical
computations. Codes are thus validated not only for simple solutions, but for
complex spatio-temporal behavior as well. In addition to studying specific
combustion problems, we contribute to the development of both analytical and
numerical methodology for the investigation of these and other problems.
Finally, where possible, comparisons to relevant experimental observations will
be made. We investigate mathematical problems describing combustion processes.
The primary concern in these studies is the understanding of basic mechanisms,
including cause and effect, influencing combustion, which is a necessary
prerequisite to any attempt to control the combustion process. In particular, we
study the characteristics, e.g., structure, propagation speed, stability, etc.,
of combustion waves. An example of the problems considered is the use of
combustion waves to synthesize advanced materials. In the conventional
technology, a powder mixture of components is placed in a furnace and "baked"
until it is well done. In combustion synthesis the mixture is pressed into a
solid and ignited at one end. A combustion wave then propagates through the
solid converting it to desired product. The process is significantly faster and
cheaper than the conventional technology. The nature of the product is
determined by the manner of propagation of the combustion wave, which is the
subject of our investigation.
