
* 9705723
* Problems in Dynamics of Phase Transitions and Numerical Analysis of Conversation Laws
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1997,07/08/1997
* Haitao Fan,DC,Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 06/30/2000
* USD 69,747.00

Haitao Fan Abstract: The long-range goal for the proposed project is to
understand the dynamics of liquid/vapor phase transitions and its mathematical
theories. Liquid/vapor phase transitions are important phenomena in science and
engineering. Traditional models for the dynamics of phase transition, exhibit
gaps when compared with experiments. We propose to investigate the dynamics of
liquid/vapor phase transitions through an approach different from traditional
models. The model is a system of conservation laws with source terms (the
system) based on equations for two-phase reactive flows. Based our preliminary
studies, this approach promises to better fit experiment. To accomplish our
objective, the following specific sub-objectives will be pursued: 1) Derive
qualitative and quantitative asymptotic models for the system. 2) Study issues
such as basic wave patterns in the system and its asymptotic models, e.g.,
traveling waves, admissibility criteria for shocks and phase boundaries, and the
Riemann problem. 3) Develop algorithms to carry out numerical simulations on the
system and develop test problem to justify such computations. Study issues
related to numerical schemes for the system 4) Study the well-posedness of the
system or its simplified asymptotic models. The expectations are that, at the
conclusion of the proposed period of support, results will have been obtained on
qualitative and quantitative behavior of the system, and numerical simulations
will have been carried out. Results on qualitative and quantitative behavior of
the system will be compared with experiments. Based on these comparisons, the
adequateness of the modeling can be assessed, and the modeling can be further
improved. It is expected that the results obtained will facilitate understanding
of the dynamics of liquid/vapor phase transitions. Tools for numerical
simulations of such phenomena will also result from this work. Most materials
have four phase s: solid, liquid, vapor and plasma phases. Phase transition,
such as the change from water to vapor and vice versa, is fundamental phenomena
of materials that occur in daily life and everywhere in our environment. Many
manufacturing processes, such as the growth of a single large crystal used in
semiconductor manufacturing, involve phase transitions. Liquid/vapor phase
transitions happen during the flight of airplane through clouds and during
underwater explosions. Liquid/vapor phase changes also occur at high speed
moving parts of a vessel, such as the propeller of a submarine, which consumes
energy and makes noise detectable by enemies' solar devices. In summary, phase
transitions are not only fundamental scientific properties of materials but also
vital to industrial competitiveness and national security. The proposed project
is to study the evolution of phase changes, in particular the rapid liquid/vapor
transitions induced by rapid moving body or waves. The objectives are to
establish effective mathematical models for liquid/vapor transitions that agree
with experimental data, and to develop numerical simulation tools for such phase
transitions.
