
* 9706565
* Mechanisms of Intercellular Calcium Waves
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE, OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1997,07/30/1997
* James Sneyd,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2001
* USD 230,000.00

Sneyd 9706565 Intercellular calcium waves are a ubiquitous and crucial feature
of intercellular communication, and perform a variety of physiological
functions. Most intriguingly, intercellular calcium waves in mixed neuronal-
glial cultures have been observed passing from glial cells to neurons, and thus
they may possibly have an important role to play in information processing. The
investigator uses mathematical models to study the mechanisms involved in
intercellular calcium waves. The first part of the work involves the study of
the mechanisms underlying intracellular calcium oscillations and waves in
epithelial and glial cells. Secondly, in light of recent experimental evidence,
previous models are modified and used to study the mechanisms of intercellular
calcium wave propagation in glial cell cultures. Finally, in hippocampal explant
cultures the intercellular calcium waves show a remarkable degree of spatial
organisation, forming propagating plane waves and rotating spirals. The model is
used to determine the mechanisms by which intracellular calcium waves can be
coupled on a much larger space scale to form intercellular calsium waves with
such a high degree of self-organisation. Waves of calcium that travel between
cells are one important way in which cells can signal to their neighbours. Such
intercellular communication, although not yet well understood, is known to play
a vital role in many physiological processes. For instance, the response of an
epithelial cell layer to a wound is governed (at least in part) by an
intercellular calcium wave, while, in the brain, waves of calcium can travel
from glia to neurons, and vice versa. Thus, calcium waves very likely have an
important role to play in information processing. For these reasons, there is a
great deal of interest in studying the mechanisms that underly such waves.
Mathematics has an important role to play in these studies. By its very nature,
wave propagation is a complex phe nomenon, not easily understood by intuition
alone. Although mathematics cannot provide answers to all pertinent questions,
when used in conjunction with experimental results, it can be used to interpret
and understand existing results, while directing the course of future
experimemtal studies. The investigator (a mathematician) and his experimental
colleagues propose a coordinated series of theoretical and experimental
investigations that will lead to a greater understanding of how glial cells
communicate by means of calcium waves, and how such communication can coordinate
activity over large regions of the hippocampus. Funding for the project is
provided by the program of Applied Mathematics and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and by the Computational Neuroscience
program in BIO.
