
* 9706894
* Interior Point Methods Semidefinite Programming
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1997,06/17/1998
* Kendall Atkinson,IA,University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 02/16/1999
* USD 94,749.00

PI: Florian Potra DMS-9706894 Interior Point Methods for Semidefinite
Programming Abstract Further investigation of interior point algorithms for
semidefinite programming (SDP) is proposed with emphasis on the study of global
and local convergence, infeasibility detection and software development. While
the vast majority of interior point methods for linear programming (LP) have
proven polynomial complexity, this is not the case for SDP. The iteration
complexity of interior point algorithms for SDP and its dependence on the search
direction as well as on the central path neighborhood used by the algorithm will
be investigated. Locally superlinearly convergent algorithms will be identified
within the class of interior point methods for SDP with proven polynomial
complexity. Superlinear convergence is especially important for SDP since no
finite termination schemes exist for such problems. The local convergence
analysis for interior point algorithms for SDP is much more challenging than
those for LP and it will be a major focus point of the project. A C++ package
for solving large-scale SDP problems will be developed. The code will
efficiently handle different sparsity patterns arising in applications, and will
provide refined infeasibility detectors. Semidefinite programming (SDP)
represents one of the most important classes of optimization problems with many
applications in science and engineering especially related to optimal control
(in electrical engineering), optimal allocation of resources (in economics and
manufacturing), structural optimization (in civil engineeering), etc. According
to a recent survey paper, semidefinite programming is ``the most exciting
development in mathematical programming in the 1990's''. Until recently no
efficient methods were known for solving general semidefinite programming
problems. In the late 80's it has been realized that interior point methods,
initially developed for linear programming, can be successfully used for solving
semidefinite programming problems. The advent of interior point methods has
created new opportunities for the application of SDP in science and engineering.
In order for these opportunities to materialize it is important to provide the
scientific community with a good theoretical understanding of the behaviour of
interior point methods for SDP and with reliable and efficient software capable
of solving large-scale SDP problems. The project will investigate some of the
most critical issues in the theory of semidefinite programming and will lead to
the design of efficient practical algorithms. The software resulting from this
project is likely to have a positive impact on several application areas in
science and technology.
