
* 9732675
* Knot Theory and Molecular Biology
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1998,05/07/1998
* David Miller,NJ,William Paterson University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1999
* USD 74,978.00

The primary objective of this proposal is for the Principal Investigator to
acquire a thorough background in the techniques of molecular biology, both
theoretical and experimental, and exposure to contemporary research in the
modeling of long-strand biological molecules from chemical, physical, and
mathematical perspectives, in order to bring to fruition a research program that
will develop and apply techniques of knot theory to obtain new understanding of
the dynamics of DNA, RNA and polymeric proteins. In addition, this proposal will
lead to the development and implementation of model graduate programs in
biomathematics.

The principal investigator will serve as a visiting faculty member in the
Department of Biomathematics at Mount Sinai School of Medicine from July 1, 1998
to June 30, 1999. This experience will shape the PI's research program in
mathematics and its applications during the grant period and in subsequent
years. The modeling of the relationship between the structure and function in
DNA and other biological molecules is an area of increasing importance and one
that has many unexplored facets. The vast storehouse of DNA sequence data
currently being generated will only become useful when the dynamics of its
molecular function are understood. Knot theory has already emerged as an
important descriptive and foundational language for developing models of
molecular function. The application to these problems of new techniques of knot
theory has the potential to revolutionize our understanding of molecular biology
by enabling the development of the kind of valid and complete descriptions of
molecular dynamics that are required for the accurate prediction of structure
and function.

The expertise that the PI will obtain will also enrich the educational
experiences and broaden the career options for students in his subsequent
academic endeavors. The PI will engage in interdisciplinary interactions with
students and faculty in the biological sciences and will work to implement
graduate programs in biomathematics. Graduates of such programs, both at the
master's and doctoral levels will enjoy excellent employment opportunities in
the pharmaceutical industry.

This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
