
* 9801227
* Conference on Waves and Continuation Methods in Biology and Related Areas
* DMS,NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1998,07/30/1998
* Stuart Hastings,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 15,000.00

Hastings 9801227 The investigator and his colleagues organize an
interdisciplinary conference to bring together biologists and mathematicians to
discuss wave phenomena from their varying perspectives. The conference aims to
give both biologists and mathematicians insights into the types of models that
can be used for wave phenomena and the parameter ranges where such behavior can
be expected. To this end, the conference includes both general lectures and more
technical talks where particular techniques are explored more fully. Of special
interest in techniques are continuation methods in models of long range
interaction, where integral equation models are involved. One-dimensional
traveling waves have long been of interest to biologists, particularly in
neurobiology where they describe the propopagation of electrical signals down a
nerve axon or as a plane wave across a two-dimensional collection of
electrically active cells. Related phenomena include spiral and other patterns,
such as those thought to be responsible for some pathogenic behavior in cardiac
tissue. Similar patterns in the brain are of current interest as well. Such
behavior is not limited to neurobiology, and appears in a wide variety of
chemical and biological systems, such as the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction,
slime molds, and many others. On the other hand, mathematicians have studied
basic questions about waves for a variety of models, including biological and
chemical settings. One focus of mathematical work has been to prove the
existence and stability of traveling waves. In this regard continuation methods
have become particularly interesting in models of long range interaction, where
integral equations are involved. The conference brings together biologists and
mathematicians to discuss wave phenomena from their different perspectives. The
meeting fosters interactions between the two areas that should lead to greater
understanding of a variety of phenomena important in biology.
