
* 9802520
* Multidimensional Problems in Granular Plasticity
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, PMP-Particul&MultiphaseProcess
* 08/01/1998,07/30/1998
* E Bruce Pitman,NY,SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Hans Engler
* 07/31/2000
* USD 16,588.00

DMS-9802520 Pitman This interdisciplinary proposal addresses scientific issues
regarding the dynamics of granular materials coupled with interstitial fluid.
The investigation is composed of three parts: modeling, analysis, and numerical
computation. Models of particle-fluid motion must determine which physical
mechanisms are dominant and which may be neglected without detrimental effect.
In particular, traditional models of these flows treat the particle phase as a
fluid-like material with a viscosity that depends on the particle volume
fraction. A significant component of this research program is to study the
effects of modeling the particle phase as a frictional material. Analysis will
be primarily directed toward a study of the stability of distinguished solutions
to the model equations. Numerical simulations will provide an understanding of
nonlinearity in the equations, especially the effect of the particle phase
model. These complementary methods of investigation will be guided by recent
experiments that highlight the need for a new approach to the question of
particle-fluid interaction. The combined flow of particles and fluid has many
industrial applications, such as particle coating and drying, particle flow in
pressurized vessels and cat-crackers, transport by lubrication, and heat
transfer. New xerographic and metallurgic technology necessitate very fine
powders. In these latter applications, however, as particle size decreases,
transport and handling become more difficult, and the effects of interstitial
gas become more important. Without better characterization of particle-fluid
flows, products that exploit new technologies may not come on-line as quickly,
nor with sufficient reliability. In this regard, it is useful to note a study by
the Rand Corporation showing that, because of an inability to accurately predict
powder behavior, solids-producing manufacturing plants performed on average at
63% of design capacity, compared to 84% for liquids-producing plants . This
project will study new mathematical models for the behavior of very fine
powders. The results of this project will be compared with concurrent
experimental work by industrial researchers.
