
* 9802225
* n-Widths and Singular Perturbation Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1998,07/06/1998
* Bruce Kellogg,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Hans Engler
* 06/30/2000
* USD 6,800.00

Singularly perturbed partial differential equations are used to model boundary
and interior layers in transport and fluid flow, and in high frequency wave
propagation. It is difficult to approximate the solution to these equations
because of regions of rapid change in the solution. The best approximation
properties of solutions to some singularly perturbed linear partial differential
equations will be studied. The research will build on some recent work of
Kellogg and Stynes that treats a singularly perturbed self adjoint problem.
Equations that model convection and wave propagation will be studied. The goal
is to obtain the best approximation properties (in the sense of Kolmogorov) when
the data of the problem are restricted to have a specified smoothness. A
successful resolution of these best approximation problems will lead to
asymptotic expansions of the solution with minimal smoothness requirements on
the data, and hopefully to better numerical methods for the numerical
computation of these solutions.

Physical systems that involve boundary and interior layers are of considerable
importance in industrial applications. A typical example is the turbulent layer
of air near an aircraft wing. Wave propagation problems, arising e.g. in radar
or ultrasound are important in both medical and military applications. These
seemingly different problems are similar in that there are phenomena taking
place over a very short span of distance or time. This leads to difficulties in
calculating the behavior of such systems. The research under this award will
study the basic approximation properties of the equations governing these
systems.
