
* 9802370
* Relativistic Fluids and the Coupling of Gravity to Other Forces
* DMS,Gravity Theory, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1998,06/17/1998
* Joel Smoller,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Hans Engler
* 06/30/2001
* USD 120,000.00

The proposer will continue his investigations in two areas: i) shock-waves in
Einstein's Theory of General Relativity with applications to cosmology and ii)
the coupling of Einstein's equations for the gravitational field to other
(fundamental) force fields; for example to electromagnetism and nuclear forces.
In part i) he will investigate his alternative model to the standard "Big-Bang"
cosmology. In this theory, the observable universe began with a shock wave
explosion into a stationary (time-independent) space. This explosion created the
expanding universe that astronomers observe today. The leading edge of this
expansion is modeled by an outward propagating shock-wave. Since shock-waves are
irreversible solutions of the equations, information about the past is lost as
the shock-wave advances. In this model one should therefore not expect a unique
time reversal of the solution all the way back to an initial Big-Bang, whereby
the entire universe was compressed into a tiny region. In part ii) the proposer
will study how solutions of the equations of Quantum Mechanics change when
gravity is taken into account. Up to now, gravity has been ignored in elementary
particle theory, because gravity is much weaker than nuclear forces and
electromagnetism. Preliminary calculations of the proposer show that in spite of
the weakness of the gravitational force, the addition of gravity into the
equations has a "smoothing"effect on solutions, and greatly modifies some
aspects of elementary particle theory.

The proposer will do research in two areas. First, he will investigate an
alternative scenario to the standard "Big-Bang" cosmology. In his model the
observable universe began with a shock-wave explosion rather than from an
incredibly dense small region the size of a grapefruit. Consistent with some
recent astronomical observations of huge energy bursts in the very outer regions
of the cosmos, this theory implies that there may be other distant universes
which also arise from shock-wave explosions. Secondly, the proposer will study
the effect that gravity has on other forces (electromagnetism and nuclear
forces). Since the gravitational force is extremely weak in comparison to these
other forces, physicists have ignored gravity in studying elementary particles.
However, the proposer has found that the inclusion of gravity does actually play
a role in elementary particle theory. Furthermore, he will investigate the
possibility that quantum-theoretic effects play a role in the study of black
holes.
