
* 9803323
* Shock Wave Theory
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1998,09/24/2002
* Tai-Ping Liu,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2003
* USD 226,000.00

DMS-9803323 Tai-Ping Liu We propose to study two fundamental questions for
general systems of hyperbolic conservation laws: The first is the well-posedness
problem. This is done with Tong Yang. For this, we already constructed a
nonlinear functional for the two conservation laws and are in the process of
doing so for the general systems. The second problem is to study multi-
dimensional gas flows. Lien and the author have succeeded in showing that three-
dimensional self-similar gas flow past a cone is nonlinearly stable. We are
generalizing the new approach of superpositioning local self-similar flows to
other problems. We expect this approach to yield new qualitative information on
nonlinear stability and instability of multi-dimensional gas flows. Our second
project is to study the viscous conservation laws. With Zeng, we are in the
process of studying the stability of nonlinear waves for hyperbolic-parabolic
systems such as the compressible Navier-Stokes equations. Other problems in
combustion and MHD, and numerical analysis of shock calculations are being
considered. Of particular interest is the role of dissipative parameters on the
structure and stability of nonlinear waves. The pointwise approach the author
introduced is effective for these purposes. The author plans to study basic
questions concerning the invisicd and viscous solutions for gas dynamics and
mechanics. One of the fundamental questions concerns the validity of the Euler
equations for the gas dynamics. The equations were derived by Euler in the
eighteenth century. Only until recently the author and his collaborator are able
to show that the equations are mathematically valid in that small errors in the
data yield small errors in the solutions. This is of obvious importance in the
applications because there is always small error either in the experimental data
or numerical computations. Other problems of interest to the author include the
sensitive role of di ssipation parameters. In combustion, magneto-hydrodynamics,
nonlinear elasticity and other continuum physics, dissipative mechanisms, such
as viscosity, heat conductivity, and species diffusions are important. The
geometric properties and stability of the nonlinear waves may depend sensitively
on these parameters. The author has recently introduced a pointwise approach,
which is effective in studying the nonlinear interactions of waves. The role of
dissipation parameters are being studied using the basic conservation laws in
physics.
