
* 9803305
* Fundamental and Applied Problems in Granular Flow
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/1998,06/14/2000
* David Schaeffer,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/2002
* USD 540,000.00

Fundamental and Applied Problems in Granular Flow David Schaeffer/ Michael
Shearer This project focuses on three aspects of the flow of granular materials:
an investigation of fluctuations, flows and stresses in industrial silos, and
liquefaction of soils. The various issues will be addressed using an
interdisciplinary approach involving analysis, computation and experiment. The
latter two parts will also involve input from industrial and geotechnical
experts. Details of each subproject follow. Subproject 1, fluctuations in
sheared granular materials: Recent work has shown that fluctuations of forces
and to some extent velocities can be very large for moderate scale systems. The
experimental part of this project will provide additional quantitative
characterizations of these fluctuations for modest scale slowly sheared systems.
In addition, new experiments will be constructed of a Couette type that will
probe force fluctuations on larger length and time scales. These experiments
will be integrated into ongoing work to model force fluctuations by lattice type
models, and computations using novel hybrid molecular dynamics and finite
element codes. Subproject 2, flow in industrial silos: In collaboration with
engineers at the firm Jenike and Johanson, Inc. the co-PI's of this project will
analyze flows in a spatial region that corresponds to the shape of a typical
hopper. This analysis will be based both on Coulomb materials and on critical
state soil mechanics (CSSM). Some of the aspects under study will include an
investigation of the relationship between CSSM and Coulomb models, shock and
rarefaction wave solutions, boundary value problems for hopper flow, and
stability of such solutions. An important application is the design of flow
corrective devices. Subproject 3, liquefaction of soils: This phenomenon
corresponds to the abrupt loss of load-bearing capacity of a loose, water-
saturated soil, possibly leading to a massive landslide. Real world s oil
failure/liquefaction will be investigated in collaboration with G. Gudehus and
his associates. This project will combine experiments, mathematical analysis,
computer simulation and industrial/geotechnical expertise to better understand
the flow of granular materials. The area of study is of considerable importance
to technical processes involving all types of granular materials, including but
by no means limited to chemical process industries, and to the handling of coal,
ores, food grains, and pharmaceuticals. Many aspects of the above processes are
not fully understood, leading in some cases to enormous financial losses. Also
under consideration are geotechnical issues such as the stability of
embankments, as well as the stability of soils under earthquake conditions. The
project will involve the application of existing theories for granular materials
to such fundamental problems as flows in hoppers and stability of soils in
landfills. New models will be developed in order to take into account some
important aspects of granular flows such as fluctuations of forces. Recent
experiments in this lab have shown that fluctuations, which are not accounted
for in existing models, can be very strong and may well be necessary to provide
safe and reliable design criteria for industrial devices involving granular
flows. The models will be tightly linked to the experimental data, on the one
hand, and, on the other hand, will be the basis of computer solutions for
relevant technical problems.
