
* 9803181
* Dynamics and Control of Mechanical Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1998,06/14/2000
* Anthony Bloch,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2002
* USD 118,400.00

9803181 Bloch In this project the proposer will continue research into the
dynamics and control of nonlinear mechanical systems in finite- and infinite-
dimensions. In particular, research is proposed in the following areas:
integrable Hamiltonian systems in finite- and infinite-dimensions, the
stabilization and control of nonlinear mechanical systems, the analysis and
control of nonholonomic systems with constraints, the optimal control of systems
with constraints, and the dynamics and control of infinite-dimensional systems
and systems with complex dynamics. The proposer will analyze two basic classes
of integrable systems -- the Toda lattice in finite- and infinite-dimensions,
and the generalized rigid body equations. The proposer's view of these systems
is inspired by work in applied analysis -- optimization and control problems.
The proposer will also investigate the dynamics of nonholonomic systems. Such
systems, which are mechanical systems subject to nonintegrable constraints such
as rolling, are not Hamiltonian in general but nonetheless conserve energy. This
leads to very rich behavior including the possibility of asymptotic stability.
With his collaborators the proposer has been developing an energetic approach to
the control of nonlinear mechanical systems which leaves the system in classical
Lagrangian form despite the presence of feedback. This enables the classical
theory of stability, which is normally applied to autonomous systems, to be
applied to classes of controlled systems. Several other problem in the control
and dynamics of finite- and infinite-dimensional systems are discussed, such as
the analysis of the structure and stability of interconnected systems including
linked finite- and infinite-dimensional systems. In broad terms the proposer
will study the behavior and control of various mechanical systems that are
important in physics and engineering. Engineering applications include aerospace
systems and robotics. He will study certain model systems that can be solved
explicitly. Such systems are important for the light they shed on the behavior
of more complicated systems which can only be simulated on a computer. He will
also consider the optimization of the behavior of various mechanical control
systems. This optimization is important not only for obtaining desirable system
behavior but for reducing cost. He will study various methods for controlling
the motion of such systems as robots and satellites. In the modeling of
satellites he will consider the importance of flexible appendages such as
antennae in the stability of their motion. He will also analyze the motion of
systems in fluids -- for example the motion of underwater vehicles. In general
the hope is to obtain a better understanding of the dynamics and control of a
large class of engineering and physical systems.
