
* 9803555
* Mathematical Methods for Chaotic Advection in Three-Dimensional Fluid Flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1998,11/30/2001
* Igor Mezic,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Mavriplis
* 12/31/2001
* USD 75,000.00

DMS 9803555

Mathematical Methods for Chaotic Advection in Three-dimensional Fluid Flows

PI: Igor Mezic

The goal of the proposed research is to extend the existing theory of chaotic
advection and mixing in two-dimensional, time-dependent flows. In particular, we
wish to study three-dimensional incompressible steady and unsteady and two- and
three-dimensional compressible flows using the methods of geometric theory of
dynamical systems. We will also study effects of reaction and diffusion on the
motion of particles in these flows, properties of chaotic advection in general,
and particular models of great relevance in engineering applications: flows
between concentric and eccentric rotating cylinders. These problems will be
addressed starting from our recent developments in geometric theory of three-
dimensional divergence-free vector fields. The issues of cantori, resonances and
lobe dynamics in volume-preserving maps and flows will be addressed through
theoretical analysis and computer simulation. Connection with experiments on
mixing in three-dimensional flows will be made. Effects of inertia and viscosity
on chaotic mixing will be studied via asymptotic, large Reynolds number analysis
in conjunction with the transport theory of dynamical systems. This will allow
for discussion of the change of mixing properties of laminar, incompressible,
viscous flows with the change of the Reynolds number. Further, we will study the
effects of molecular diffusion on chaotic advection based on the perturbative
multiple-scales method combined with ergodic theory, and through numerical
simulations. We will investigate a general relationship between the pure
advection problem (possibly with chaotic mixing) and the full advection-
diffusion problem. We will study reaction-diffusion-advection equations through
the combination of tools mentioned before. We shall pursue nonlinear stability
analysis in search of effects of chaotic advection on stability. The particular
examples we will be studying are flows between concentric rotating cylinders.
Compressible flows received virtually no attention in chaotic advection studies.
We propose to remedy this situation by pursuing a basic study of this problem.
Simple model flows will be identified starting with a compressible vortex flow
in a cylindrical container. Comparison with the behavior of incompressible flows
will be pursued.

The above study is useful in a variety of technological contexts. There is a
recent surge of interest in micro- and nano-scale technology that poses a number
of mathematical challenges. For example, flows in devices such as large mixers
and combustion chambers are designed to mix well by moving the flow in a
turbulent regime and thus causing enhanced mixing by rapid random movements of
fluid in the flow. This is not possible in microscopic devices. The process of
mixing needs to be understood much better in order to design microscopic mixers,
combustion chambers etc. necessary as the building block of microscopic
processing devices and microengines. The mixing process in such devices is
typically three-dimensional. Thus, the design of microscopic mixing devices will
benefit from the fundamental study of three-dimensional mixing processes
outlined above. In addition, the performance of macroscopic devices is
challenged by new requirements on the levels of environmental chemical pollution
(NO_x) and sound pollution. The improvement in the design of these devices will
be based on a better understanding of the underlying mixing processes. The above
study will provide some of the crucial concepts for such design by unraveling
the fundamentals of mixing in three-dimensional flows and using these concepts
to study the effect of mixing on combustion and noise production.


