
* 9804673
* Localized Structures and Complex Dynamics in Pattern Forming Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1998,07/14/1998
* Hermann Riecke,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/2002
* USD 111,000.00

9804673 Riecke

The general goal of this project is to contribute to the understanding of
spatio-temporal structures that arise spontaneously in many driven dissipative
systems. Mathematically, these systems represent dynamical systems with many
degrees of freedom. The PI will focus on waves in two-dimensional systems with
axial anisotropy. The immediate motivation is given by recent experiments by G.
Ahlers et al. on electroconvection in nematic liquid crystals, where three
interesting regimes have been observed: 1) extended waves exhibiting spatio-
temporally chaotic dynamics, 2) waves localized into narrow, long patches
(`worms'), and 3) temporally irregular, spatially localized bursting of the wave
amplitude. These phenomena are found immediately above onset at small amplitudes
of the waves. They therefore afford an excellent opportunity to develop and test
mathematical ideas that will be relevant quite generally in weakly nonlinear
theories of dissipative structures. Furthermore, due to the anisotropy this two-
dimensional system can be described systematically by Ginzburg-Landau-type
equations. No recourse to phenomenological equations of the Swift-Hohenberg-type
is needed. The main part of the project is devoted to the worms. They cannot be
described by the Ginzburg-Landau equations derived by straightforward asymptotic
analysis. The analysis has to be extended to include certain additional modes
that are strictly speaking not on the center manifold but become relevant
already very close to threshold. The main questions to be addressed are: the
localization mechanism of the worms and suitable one- dimensional reductions
(standing- and traveling-wave pulses), the stability of long worms, and the
nucleation of worms from small noise. The project will demonstrate how in cases
like the one described here the qualitative and quantitative relevance of the
weakly nonlinear theory can be drastically increased by including a single
additional mode. This aspect carries over to a wide range of other systems. On a
more specific level, the advection of a slow mode will be important in other
wave systems as well. At the same time, for the electroconvection system
detailed qualitative and quantitative comparisons with ongoing experiments will
be achieved through close cooperation with the experimentalists.

In wide range of systems spatial structures appear spontaneously. These patterns
can be time-independent or may have the form of traveling or standing waves.
Just a few examples are animal coat markings, waves on the surface of vibrated
fluids, cloud streets, waves in chemical reactions and in nerve conduction. If
the properties of a system are the same over its whole extent one would usually
expect that the patterns also cover the whole system. However, in quite a number
of cases a spontaneous localization of the pattern in patches or even single
wave crests has been observed. In repeated runs of the same experiment the
patches occur in randomly varying locations. This indicates that their
localization is not due to special properties of the system at that location.
Such localized waves have been observed, e.g., in vibrated granular material,
fluid convection in mixtures, and in nematic liquid crystals. The funded
research will contribute to the understanding of the causes that lead to
localization focussing on the `worms' observed in liquid crystals. It will
elucidate the mechanism in detail and investigate the chaotic bursting of such
structures and how they are generated (nucleated) from weak noise that is due to
the thermal motion in the fluid. Using advanced mathematical methods, the
research will bring out the central features that are relevant more generally in
other systems as well.
