
* 9804602
* Periodically and Random Driven Dynamics in Nonlinear Optical Fibers
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1998,07/07/2000
* William Kath,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2002
* USD 142,450.00

Dispersion management is the technique of concatenating two or more optical
fibers with different dispersion parameters to form a system with periodically
varying dispersion. This technique makes it is possible to have both high local
and low average dispersion in the system. The high local dispersion reduces
four-wave mixing (an effect that distorts signals and produces intersymbol
interference in transmissions), while the low average dispersion reduces the net
cumulative effects of dispersion over long optical fiber spans. Overall,
therefore, dispersion management reduces effects which are detrimental to the
performance of optical-fiber based communication systems, thus allowing
transmission capacity to be increased. In mathematical terms, what must be
studied are nonlinear wave equations with rapidly varying coefficients. The
theory of these equations is currently not well understood and will be advanced
with support from this award.

The theme of this research is the development of new mathematical techniques
with which to model the propagation of optical pulses in nonlinear optical
fibers. It is important to properly understand the dynamics of such pulses in
optical communication and information processing systems so that new techniques
can be devised to increase their overall capacity. In particular, new
mathematical methods for dealing with dispersion management will be
investigated, in order to predict and improve the performance of such systems.


