
* 9804056
* Control Problems of Systems of Strongly Coupled Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1998,06/02/2000
* Irena Lasiecka,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2002
* USD 304,478.00

9804056 Lasiecka

The present proposal aims at investigating mathematical aspects, as well as
control and optimization properties, of models of interactive systems, which are
described by strongly coupled partial differential equations, and which are
subject to boundary and point control action. These are both the mathematically
most challenging and the physically most relevant cases. The systems chosen are
complex and realistic enough to serve as benchmark problems for the
technological applications described below. Specific issues to be examined for
the entire structure, and/or a component thereof, include: (1) well-posedness
and regularity of solutions; (2) exact controllability in the oscillatory case
for systems such as shells; (3) uniform stability of the structure solutions as
well as, in the non-linear case, a corresponding study of the asymptotic
behavior; (4) optimal control theory and min-max game theory with non-definite
quadratic cost, as well as robust stabilization. While in recent years these
problems have reached a considerable level of maturity for single classes of
dynamics - diffusive and oscillatory - their study to strongly coupled systems
with components of both diffusive and/or oscillatory type is just at its
infancy.

Control, optimization and stability problems for dynamical systems have long
played a well-recognized and critical role on a broad range of diverse
applications. In recent years, the emerging technology of smart materials and
structures has brought forth to the front of scientific investigation the
pressing need to control, optimize and stabilize "interactive structures", whose
components' dynamical behavior is governed by partial differential equations.
Recent civilian and military research has convincingly demonstrated smart
materials/structures to be a laboratory reality. These new structural concepts
actively damp noise and vibration, suppress flutter at the trailing edges of
airfoils, suppress the airborne or water borne acoustic signatures of ground
vehicles, aircraft, and submarines, and reduce the stressful noise levels within
them. A realistic problem of keen, present interest to both the civilian and
military industry is the problem of reducing, or eliminating, the unwanted noise
field in a three dimensional cabin with curved walls, modeled by shells, by
means of smart materials such as piezo-electric patches or memory alloys bonded
to, or embedded in, an elastic wall. When wired with an appropriate voltage
(control), the resulting bending moment generated by the elastic wall is
expected to produce acoustic waves that counter the unwanted noise, thus leading
to their elimination.
