
* 9805483
* A Mathematical Framework for Tensor Image Processing
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Engineering of Biomed Systems
* 09/15/1998,07/18/2001
* Akram Aldroubi,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2002
* USD 124,875.00

Aldroubi 9805483

The investigator develops a mathematical framework for representing discrete
tensor images that is suited to post-processing applications, such as pattern
recognition, registration and geometric transformations. In particular, he
constructs atomic Wiener amalgam tensor spaces that consist of continuous tensor
fields, and establishes conditions on the generating tensors that guarantee that
the discrete tensor field spaces obtained by any regular sampling of the
continuous spaces are atomic and are isomorphic to the continuous spaces. Using
the connection between the approximation problems in atomic spaces and the
filtering paradigm in signal and image processing, he develops and implements
fast filtering algorithms for various fundamental processing operators, such as
noise reduction, rotation, translation, and general affine transformations.
Because tensor image data possess spatial information about the fiber structure
and geometry of materials, tissues, or organs, he also uses results from
differential geometry to extract different architectural features of ordered
media. Part of the project is devoted to testing the accuracy, precision and
speed of these algorithms. For this purpose, he generates synthetic data sets
and also uses real data acquired from in vivo clinical diffusion tensor MRI
studies, and other imaging modalities, to evaluate the performance of these
algorithms.

This project is motivated primarily by the need to process and analyze clinical
data obtained from diffusion tensor MRI, a new noninvasive imaging modality that
allows physicians to visualize nerve and muscle fiber tracts in the body.
However, the mathematics developed here is applicable to processing and
analyzing data acquired from a much larger number of imaging devices and
modalities used in diverse application areas including medicine, material
sciences, oceanography, meteorology, fluid mechanics, satellite reconnaissance,
and astronomy. Many new scanning systems measure several quantities at each
point or position within an image rather than a single quantity. These lists of
numbers may represent important physical quantities, such as velocities or
displacements, or the amount of light absorbed, reflected, or emitted at
different wavelengths at a particular location. The theory being developed here
provides a rational means to represent, process, analyze and compress this data
-- a problem which no theory currently treats. In addition, this work is
intended to ameliorate many problems inherent in the measurement of these new
types of data sets. In particular, imaging data are usually corrupted by noise,
are discrete rather than continuous, and are spatially averaged. Finally,
because these new imaging modalities can generate vast amounts of data, the
algorithms that the investigator implements for representing, processing,
analyzing, and compressing the data must be fast and efficient, as well.
