
* 9805494
* Modeling and Computational Studies of Cell and Tissue Movement
* DMS,PLANT FUNGAL & MICROB DEV MECH, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/1998,06/28/1999
* Hans Othmer,UT,University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 400,000.00

Othmer 9805494 The principal investigator and his colleagues formulate and
analyze mathematical models for the motion of individual, non-interacting cells
and for the collective motion of cellular aggregates in which cells interact
strongly. They use the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum as the model
system because it exemplifies both the free-ranging movement of individual cells
and the collective motion of aggregates, and because it is widely used as a
model experimental system for the study of cell movement. There is a large body
of experimental data on this system, and several labs have agreed to share their
new data as it becomes available. Three complementary subprojects are pursued in
parallel. The first is to investigate an individual cell-based model that
incorporates internal structure and active force generation and allows the
investigators to evaluate various theoretical proposals for individual cell
movement. The second involves the formulation of a higher-level, cell-based
model used for analyzing the collective motion of many cells, and the third
employs a continuum approach in which the cellular system is modeled as a
viscoelastic fluid with contributions to the stress tensor from both the
intracellular stress and the viscoelastic interactions between cells. Current
information on the movement is used in the formulation of the models, and the
ongoing interaction with experimental groups provides feedback on the validity
of the models and enables the investigators to suggest experiments to test the
models. However, what is learned on cell and tissue movement not only is
applicable to Dictyostelium discoideum, but also can be used in several other
contexts, including embryonic development, wound healing, and the immune system.
Cell and tissue movement plays a vital role throughout the lifespan of many
organisms. Bacteria and other single-cell organisms find food and avoid
repellents by swimming in favorable directions, and cells such as macrophages in
the human immune system must detect sites of infection and move toward them in
order to ingest bacteria and cellular debris. At the tissue level, the
coordinated movement of aggregates of cells plays a critical part in such
diverse processes as early embryonic development and wound healing. Thus it is
important to develop a better understanding of cell movement and its control,
both in the low-density regime where cells move individually, and at tissue-
level densities where cells interact strongly and move collectively.
Mathematical modeling can play an important role in understanding these
processes by testing hypotheses that are difficult to test experimentally with
current technology. A better understanding of how cells and tissues move will
lead, for example, to a better understanding of the formation and control of
bacterial biofilms, which are deleterious in contexts such as medical
transplants, but valuable in contexts such as pollution control and drug
production.
