
* 9807755
* Competition & Biodiversity in Heterogeneous Landscapes: Model Simplification through Moment Equations
* DMS,POP & COMMUNITY ECOL PROG, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1998,08/20/1998
* Stephen Pacala,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1999
* USD 65,000.00

Pacala 9807755 The primary goal of this project is to interpret analytically the
effects of spatial environmental heterogeneity on the community dynamics and
biodiversity of ecological systems. Simulation models and experimental studies
have convincingly demonstrated the importance of endogenous and exogenous
spatial heterogeneity, such as variation in resource supply rate or topography,
to the coexistence and the maintenance of diversity in ecological communities.
However, both mathematicians and ecologists still lack analytic understanding of
the mechanisms operating, particularly in fully spatial, stochastic
environments. The investigators extend existing analyses of the effects of
heterogeneity by using a wide range of models (from metapopulation models to
interacting particle systems and point processes); they develop moment
approximations, which express spatial population dynamics in terms of mean
densities and covariances, to simplify the analysis while preserving both
exogenous and endogenous heterogeneity. The study uses moment approximations,
and more standard techniques, to analyze the effects of environmental
heterogeneity, endogenous heterogeneity, and their interaction on population
dynamics and competitive outcomes in ecological models of plant and marine
intertidal communities. Field ecologists have long known that small-scale
variability in environmental factors such as soils or temperature can affect the
structure and diversity of ecological communities --- which and how many species
can live together in a region. Ecological modellers, however, have often found
simple explanations for small-scale spatial patterns of biodiversity, caused by
interactions between plants or animals (such as competition or predation), that
ignore environmental variability. Computer simulation models have recently gone
a long way toward reconciling these two camps, but (1) simulations show that
patterns occur, but do not always explain why; and (2) even powerful computers
have limits (it could be foolhardy, for example, to attempt to simulate every
tree on a continent in order to predict the effects of global climate change).
This study develops simple mathematical models that combine spatial variability
caused by interactions between organisms with spatial variability caused by the
environment to explore how these two kinds of variability affect the structure
and diversity of communities. The results from these simple models will
eventually show how to build more complex and realistic models that can predict
patterns of biodiversity and ecosystem productivity, and will provide a much
more general understanding of how variability in the environment leads to
diversity in ecological communities.


