
* 9816802
* Mathematical Prediction of the Physical Properties of Materials and Media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/1998,06/14/2000
* Oscar Bruno,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Engler
* 05/31/2001
* USD 154,917.00

The mathematical investigations to be conducted under the present award, which
relate to theoretical and computational aspects of Partial Differential
Equations (PDE), constitute a natural continuation of Dr. Bruno's recent efforts
on PDE problems in materials science, plasma physics and electromagnetism. The
proposed work in computational electromagnetism involves generalization of high-
order scattering solvers introduced recently to a variety of complex three-
dimensional systems arising in applications -- including deformed or eroded
bodies, rough surfaces and oceans as well as general surfaces and heterogeneous
bodies in three dimensional space. Further generalizations of related complex-
analytic approaches to theoretical and computational aspects of plasma physics
are also envisioned. In the area of materials science, on the other hand, the
work to be carried out relates mainly to problems of elasticity in metallic
alloys, ceramics and other systems whose behavior is determined by an underlying
microscopic structure. Specifically, Dr. Bruno will seek methods to compute the
effects of microscopic inhomogeneous deformations and other microscopic misfits
on a macroscopic body. These methods will then be used to study phenomena such
as shape memory effect in polycrystals, thermal shatter in polycrystalline
ceramics, hardening in magneto/electro-rheological fluids, microfracture at
grain boundaries, etc.

The mathematical research that will performed with this award has applications
that include radar, sonar, remote sensing, clutter removal in remote sensing
applications, amongst others in the area of electromagnetism, as well as design
of modern materials, toughened ceramics, smart structures, actuators and sensors
in the area of materials science. The novel approaches that will be studied,
developed and applied have been successfully tested in a variety of
configurations. They have already lead to theoretical advances and computational
capabilities well beyond those available previously in the general areas of
electromagnetic scattering and materials science and will now be extended to
more complicated situations and a wider class of materials and media. This work
is to be pursued in collaboration with colleagues and postdoctoral associates in
academia and industry in addition to graduate students. The students'
participation will be designed to provide a sound general education in applied
mathematics, including substantial expertise in design of state-of-the-art
simulation capabilities. Students will be involved in concrete applications in
fields related to those mentioned above, and, in addition, by direct interaction
with scientists from industry or national labs. Dr. Bruno will prepare
researchers for careers in a wide range of areas of applied mathematics, ranging
from the more theoretical to the engineering-oriented, and will provide them
with a solid theoretical background, with a talent for simulation, and with a
strong commitment to applications in science and engineering.


