
* 9870183
* Chaos with Multiple Positive Lyapunov Exponents
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 08/01/1998,07/25/2000
* James Yorke,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 10/31/2001
* USD 330,000.00

9870183 Yorke

Chaotic dynamics has been a fertile area of mathematical research in recent
years, and chaos has now been observed in many scientific fields. Much of the
progress to date in the study of chaotic dynamics has focused on low-dimensional
systems, and many phenomena are well understood in certain low-dimensional
cases. Even when systems with higher- dimensional state spaces are considered,
often the dynamics takes place on a low-dimensional attractor (by "low", we mean
up to dimension 2 for maps and 3 for flows). This proposal seeks to explore how
some of the phenomena associated with chaotic dynamical systems extend to cases
that are fundamentally higher-dimensional -- that is, when the system is
expanding in more than one dimension, or in other words has more than one
positive Lyapunov exponent.

Higher-dimensional chaos can occur in models of many engineering devices and in
meteorological models and climate models. This research will tell us, for
example, if mathematical models can suddenly get trapped in artificial windows
of regular behavior. These windows would be artificial in that any realistic
level of noise would disrupt the regular behavior. Our research will also shed
light on the reliability of computer simulations for higher dimensional models.
This study is critical to realistic modeling of complex systems.
