
* 9877090
* Optimization for Systems Under Uncertainty: Modeling, Asymptotic Analysis, and Recursive Algorithms
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/1999,06/17/1999
* Gang George Yin,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/2003
* USD 120,000.00

Proposal Title: Optimization for Systems under Uncertainty: Modeling, Asymptotic
Analysis, and Recursive Algorithms Proposal Number: DMS-9877090 PI: G. George
Yin Affl.: Department of Mathematics, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202
Tel. 313-577-2496, Fax 313-577-7596, Email: gyin@math.wayne.edu

Abstract

Technical Description:

Focusing on modeling and optimization for systems under uncertainty, this
proposal consists of four parts. Part I proposes two types of algorithms. The
first one is an approximation of an analog diffusion machine; the second one
also takes measurement errors into consideration. Our goal is to develop
asymptotic properties of such algorithms. By using weak convergence methods,
suitably scaled sequences will be shown to converge to appropriate diffusions.
Part II treats a class of hybrid models. Approximation schemes for systems
involving singularly perturbed Markov chains with weak and strong interactions
will be developed, which are useful for natural time-scale separation and
reduction of complexity for large-scale systems. Part III investigates
asymptotic properties of solutions of Cauchy problems arising from null-
recurrent diffusions. Our focus is on obtaining convergence and rate of
convergence of the solutions. One of the primary motivations comes from the
investigation of singularly perturbed systems. The results will be useful to the
ever expanding applications in optimization, controlled Markov systems,
hierarchical decision making, production planning, telecommunication, queueing
networks, and system reliability. Part IV models single-machine scheduling
problems under random processing time, and/or under random machine breakdowns
and repairs, and/or subject to random compression of processing times. Our
objectives are to develop feasible models and to obtain optimal scheduling
policies for the underlying systems. These results will allow us to design
scheduling models and strategies for more complex jobshops by considering
integrated processes as single-machine systems.

Nontechnical explanation:

To bridge the gap between theory and applications, this research project
includes three components: modeling, asymptotic analysis, and simulation. The
ultimate goals are to provide useful models, to investigate their basic
properties, and to develop sound and feasible algorithms. Part 1 proposes two
classes of algorithms with applications to machine learning, image segmentation,
and various global optimization tasks. To meet the increasing demand on robust
design and control of systems in speech and pattern recognition, signal
processing, telecommunications, and manufacturing, Part 2 aims to reduce the
complexity of a large-scale system of complex structure by using a simple system
via approximation schemes. The origin of the planned work for Part 3 stems from
the effort of modeling uncertainties due to random influence such as demands for
a product in a manufacturing system or fluctuation in the stock market. To
control the underlying system, it is imperative to understand the system's long-
term behavior, which is our primary goal. In production planning, it is vital to
provide good strategy in sequencing the parts to be processed by the machines.
Part 4 proposes single-machine scheduling models in uncertain environment. The
proposed work aims to develop optimal scheduling policies. The overall planned
work represents a continuation of the PI's recent preliminary exploration in
these areas. It is expected that the results will be applicable in the further
improvements of optimization methods.
