
* 9970977
* Instabilities in fluid motion
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1999,07/21/1999
* Susan Friedlander,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2002
* USD 57,000.00

9970977 Friedlander

Remarkably little is known about the detailed structure of the stability
spectrum of the Euler equations that govern the motion of an inviscid fluid.
This is the case even though it is a classical problem and one fundamental to an
understanding of turbulent flow. Friedlander will continue to exploit the
concept of a "fluid Lyapunov exponent" which provides an effective means for
detecting high frequency instabilities in the essential part of the spectrum.
Instabilities may also arise in the discrete spectrum and in this situation no
general approach is, at present, possible. Analysis of the eigenvalue problem
will be given for a specific 2-dimensional flow with a "cat's eye" type
structure which appears to typify an interesting class of flows containing both
oscillatory regions and hyperbolic stagnation points. Friedlander also proposes
to extend the range of applicability of a result of Friedlander et al that
proves under certain conditions that linear instability in a PDE implies
nonlinear instability. Friedlander et al recently proved that in two dimensions
any steady flow that is sufficiently "close" to a nondegenerate unstable flow is
also unstable. The harder problem of robustness of instability for 3-
dimensional flows will now be investigated. A novel type of flow on a torus with
nonzero flux will be investigated using techniques from free boundary problems.

The issue of stability of liquids or gases presents an important example of a
physical question that may be addressed through sophisticated mathematical
techniques. The answers have direct physical interpretations: stable flows are
robust under inevitable disturbances in the environment while unstable flows
break up rapidly. The question of stability or instability of a fluid flow is
fundamental to studies of physical phenomena including those in the oceans and
the atmosphere. In the view of many scientists, waves and instabilities lie at
the heart of our attempts to use mathematical models for long term weather
prediction and to better understand global climate change. However there are
important open questions connected with the fundamental equations that underlie
all models for fluid behavior. This proposal seeks the answers to some of these
questions related to fluid instabilities.
