
* 9971383
* Free Boundary Problems in Volatile Multi-fluid Flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1999,04/25/2001
* Burt Tilley,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/2002
* USD 121,062.00

Abstract for "Free boundary problems in volatile multi-fluid flows" by B. S.
Tilley

This proposal centers on the fundamental description of nonparallel axisymmetric
countercurrent core-annular flow regimes. The mathematical methods of solution
consist of a systematic asymptotic reduction of the continuity, Navier-Stokes,
and energy equations in each fluid to a simpler evolution equation that
describes the interfacial evolution when the radius of the tube is much smaller
than the interfacial variation along the tube's axis. This equation will contain
the physical effects of viscosity and density stratification, axial and
azimuthal components of surface forces, shear, inertia, buoyancy,
thermocapillarity, volatility, latent heat and thermal transport. In the
isothermal situation, parallel flow is possible, conditions under which the
parallel flow solution can be unstable to a large-amplitude solitary wave will
be considered. This wave is seen in experiment. The remainder of the proposal
centers on nonparallel flows, since the spatially varying solutions in the
volatile case cannot be parallel, and the isothermal problem experimentally is
susceptible to instabilities from inlet and outlet disturbances. The flow
patterns that are of interest include that hanging annular film, in which
gravity is balanced by the presence of an adverse shear in the core fluid, an
annular drop, and slug formation. Stability will be investigated through direct
numerical simulation of the evolution equation under conditions similar to those
found in experiment.

In a variety of engineering applications, the transfer of heat is the limiting
factor of the functionality of the entire engineering system, such as electrical
generators, electronic equipment cooling arrays, boiler tubes, and liquid-cooled
turbine blades. The systems used to transport heat away from the underlying
application use multiple fluid layers to increase the rate of heat transport.
These fluid systems are prone to hydrodynamic instabilities, which can greatly
reduce the heat-transport properties, leading to a breakdown in the entire
application. A theoretical and experimental understanding of these instabilities
is critical to enhancements in design. The proposed research considers a
mathematical model of a common fluid arrangement in these heat-transfer systems
as a paradigm for a better understanding of the dominant instability mechanism.
Once this mechanism is well understood, it will be possible to enhance the
performance of the underlying application. Further applications are seen in the
medical field, with the understanding of instabilities of the mucus covering of
the airways in the lungs. Understanding under what physical conditions these
instabilities occur can eventually lead to better medical treatments of some
respiratory ailments.


