
* 9971974
* Elliptic and Parabolic Equations for Partially Ordered Materials in Applied Fields
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1999,05/03/2001
* Patricia Bauman,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2003
* USD 142,000.00

Mathematical models for superconducting and liquid crystal materials in the
presence of applied fields will be analyzed. First, the behavior of solutions to
the Ginzburg-Landau system of steady-state and time-dependent nonlinear
equations with realistic boundary conditions in the presence of an applied
magnetic field will be investigated. Second, the behavior of solutions to the
system describing liquid crystals in applied fields is to be analyzed. The
mathematical models for these problems are systems of partial differential
equations. Methods to be employed in this project include maximum principles,
bifurcation theory, regularity, energy estimates, and large-time analysis of
partial differential equations, as well as numerical methods.

Modern technological devices such as superconducting films and liquid crystal
displays typically are operated in the presence of electric or magnetic fields.
It is therefore necessary to understand how these fields affect their
performance. In the case of superconductors, external magnetic fields are
present. This can result in nonsuperconducting sites in the material (called
vortices) which move and therefore degrade the device performance. Engineers
have tried to control these losses by introducing inhomogeneities in the
material that curtail the motion of vortices, but it is not well understood how
all of these effects interact and how best to use inhomogeneities to achieve
stability. In the case of liquid crystals, magnetic and electric fields are used
to change optic orientations. This is essential to the operation of display
devices and visual screens. The materials in this case are mixtures of liquid
crystals and polymers, resulting in more complicated phenomena than in the case
of superconductivity. Still, the mathematical issues are closely related. The
award will support research on mathematical models that will give basic insights
into both types of problems and help to devise effective numerical simulations.


