
* 9971830
* Numerical Methods for Molecular Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT
* 07/15/1999,06/13/2002
* Robert Skeel,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2003
* USD 214,800.00

The primary goal of the research is to create more efficient propagators for
atomistic computer simulations and thus to make possible more ambitious
scientific calculations. New deterministic and stochastic algorithms for both
dynamics and sampling are to be constructed using such techniques as operator
splitting, modified energy functions that compensate for finite steps, and
optimization of method parameters, together with physical insight. Promising
algorithms are tested and compared using mathematical analyses and computer
experiments. Tools for mathematical analysis include the concept of effective
accuracy, the method of modified equations, linear analysis, and KAM theory.
Computer experiments are performed on model problems chosen to reveal
unambiguously the properties of interest. Faster algorithms are to be
implemented in molecular modeling software being developed for widespread use in
a couple of projects at the University of Illinois Beckman Institute. Most of
the work is sufficiently general that is transfers to other types of problems
such as occur in astrophysics, wave phenomena, and mechanical engineering. And
many of the techniques can be abstracted and applied to generic problems.

Computer simulations of atomic detail are heavily employed in physics,
chemistry, materials science, and structural biology. These calculations require
the generation of sequences of atomic configurations either for the purpose of
modeling actual motion or for the purpose of calculating averaged values and
structures from a wide range of representative samples. The computing time
ranges from hours to months, so it can benefit tremendously from faster
algorithms. It is the objective of this research project to do this: to create
much more efficient propagators for dynamics and sampling that reliably achieve
acceptable levels of accuracy. The construction of such algorithms employs ideas
from mathematics and computer science together with physical insight. Promising
algorithms are tested and compared using mathematical analyses and computer
experiments. The successful ones are implemented in molecular modeling software
being developed for widespread use in a couple of projects at the University of
Illinois Beckman Institute. These advances in methodology are also to be
disseminated in articles targeted to practitioners. Many of the techniques will
apply not only to molecular simulations but also to simulations in astrophysics,
structural mechanics, and fluids. Potentially, the availability of accelerated
propagation algorithms will lead to a variety of scientific results that
otherwise would not be obtained. The performance of the research will be a
valuable interdisciplinary experience for a graduate student.


