
* 9971043
* Interfacial Phenomena and Pattern Formation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1999,07/26/1999
* Xinfu Chen,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/2002
* USD 74,000.00

Interfacial phenomena occur whenever a continuum is present that can exist in at
least two different phases (e.g. ice and water) and there is some mechanism that
generates or enforces a spatial separation between these two phases (the
freezing of the water). The separation boundaries are called interfaces or free
boundaries. The objective of the project is to study the time evolution of the
boundaries from the following points of view: (i) generation---how interfaces
emerge from an initially almost uniform non-stable equilibrium, (ii) propagation
---how interfaces move, (iii) nucleation--how phases switch from one to the
other, and (iv) pattern formation--how mathematical models can be used to
accommodate and predict commonly observed phase patterns such as rotating
spirals, oscillating spots, expanding rings, etc. The project will for the most
part be carried out on systems of reaction--diffusion equations such as
activator-inhibitor models in biology. The main tools used are the theories of
partial differential equations and geometric measure. Experimentation through
computer simulation will be an integral part of this project in order to
stimulate, predict, and validate theoretical studies.

Interfacial phenomena are commonplace in physics, chemistry, material science,
biology, and even in mathematical finance. In all these areas it is important to
predict, and eventually to control, the interfacial dynamics. The research
performed with this award will study mathematical model that govern these
seemingly complicated yet universal natural phenomena. The work will also lead
to the development of new and refined mathematical theories and tools that can
handle phenomena of instability and ambiguity. Such phenomena are often observed
in these applications.
