
* 9971307
* Topics in Risk Sensitive Control and Financial Mathematics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1999,07/12/1999
* Tomasz Bielecki,IL,Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2002
* USD 68,000.00

This research will contribute to the development of new methodologies and models
in the areas of mathematical control theory, stochastic analysis, and financial
mathematics for the purpose of solving complex problems in financial decision
making and financial engineering. It is expected that this research will have
the greatest impact on application of mathematics in the areas of optimal
portfolio management and asset allocation, as well as in the area managing of
credit risk. A fundamental aspect of the research is the concept of risk
sensitive stochastic control theory for investment problems with an infinite
planning horizon. This kind of optimization objective is appealing because
stationary trading strategies are likely to be optimal and thus there is good
potential for being able to compute optimal solutions for meaningful, practical
problems. In addition, several classes of finite planning horizon problems can
be reasonably well approximated by problems with an infinite planning horizon. A
second fundamental aspect of the proposed research is the explicit consideration
given to statistical estimation issues. Optimal control methodologies are rarely
used in the financial industry, largely because of statistical difficulties
associated with the estimation of constant drift coefficients in diffusion
process models of individual securities. This research will serve to reduce the
gap between theory and practice by developing optimization models that
incorporate exogenous factors. By explicitly modeling the dependence of the
assets on factors, it will be possible to obtain more realistic models, to
better understand the statistical estimation difficulties, and to be in a
position to apply adaptive control methods. In addition, the proposed research
will advance our understanding of quantitative aspects of default credit risk,
which is a vital element in financial decision making.

Managing large sums of dollars of notional capital is as complex as managing
global communication networks or as managing global manufacturing enterprises.
Thus common sense, intuition and experience alone will typically not suffice to
safely and efficiently manage available financial instruments. This research is
aimed at providing formal mathematical support for financial management.
Although the research will require fundamental advances within the areas of
mathematical control theory, stochastic analysis, and financial mathematics, it
is anticipated that this research will lead to new and practical tools that
eventually become widely used in the financial industry in order to enhance its
competitiveness and efficiency. This is particularly important given the impact
the U.S. financial industry has on the global economy. The big emphasis will be
placed in this research on the development of computer algorithms for solving
large-scale problems so that the effective use can be made of high-performance
computing.

----------------------
