
* 9971978
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Continuum Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1999,10/06/2000
* Zhouping Xin,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2003
* USD 87,350.00

This award will support research on nonlinear evolution partial differential
equations arising from continuum mechanics. Examples include the Euler and
Navier-Stokes equations for compressible and incompressible inviscid and viscous
fluids, the equations of electro-magneto field dynamics for electrically
conducting compressible viscous fluids, the equations of elasticity, nonlinear
Boltzmann type equations in kinetic theory of rarefied gases, and equations for
combustion, multiphase flows, and fluids with chemical reactions. The main
objective is to gain better qualitative and quantitative understanding of the
behavior of solutions, using mathematically rigorous analysis and numerical
simulations. The focus will be on understanding the effects of small scale
dissipations and relaxations on the large scale fluid motions; development of
singularities and their stuctures from smooth flows; nonlinear stability or
instability and interactions for basic linear and nonlinear waves; design and
analysis of high resolution numerical methods for large scale calculations of
discontinous flows; fluid-dynamic limit problems for various kinetic models; and
problems in multi-space dimensions and in thermo-nonequilibrium. One of the main
ideas is to overcome the difficulties that are encountered at the macroscopic
level by designing and analyzing approximate models which are physically more
fundamental and mathematically tractable. Many interesting phenomena in the
mechanics of continua can be described by mathematical models that involve
nonlinear partial differential equations. A better understanding of these models
has important applications in many sciences such as mechanics, turbulence
theory, geophysics, meteorology, aeronautics, chemical engineering, etc. This
award will support work on these fundamental models. The goal is to gain better
qualitative understanding and to improve the foundations for effective and
accurate numerical simulations.


