
* 9971772
* New Methods for the Simulation and Analysis of Waves
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1999,07/03/1999
* Thomas Hagstrom,NM,University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2002
* USD 90,000.00

New Methods for the Simulation and Analysis of Waves Thomas Hagstrom 9971772

We will develop, analyze, implement and apply new methods for the solution of
wave propagation problems. Our primary focus is on numerical techniques which
can efficiently and reliably utilize the capabilities of modern computers to
simulate problems whose scale has hitherto precluded their detailed study. A
large scale wave propagation problem will generally be given in an extended
spatial and/or temporal domain. In engineering applications, the domain will
also usually involve bodies with complex shapes. These features all pose
difficult challenges to numerical algorithms. The radiation of energy to the far
field is a feature of most wave systems and is associated with large spatial
domains. To make computational s solutions feasible, the domain must be
artificially truncated. This truncation introduces errors which have been
difficult to estimate or reduce. In recent years, we, along with other
researchers, have developed new techniques for imposing accurate truncations,
which solve this problem in some special but important cases. As part of this
project, we will extend the applicability of these new methods. Long time
simulations also make special demands on the accuracy of numerical
approximations. In particular, small inaccuracies in the wave speeds or the
effects of numerical damping will generally accumulate to produce large errors.
Therefore, highly accurate methods must be used. However, these are typically
difficult to apply in complex geometries. We will work on the development and
analysis of new methods with high orders of accuracy which can be more easily
utilized near bodies with complicated shapes. Finally, we will study some basic
problems related to the existence, smoothness, and asymptotic approximability of
solutions to the compressible Navier-Stokes equations, which describe the motion
of most common liquids and gases. We are particularly interested in flows which
are slow in comparison with the speed of sound. Such flows are typically modeled
by the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, whose mathematical theory, though
still quite incomplete, is better developed. We, however, retain the
compressible effects, and study both theoretically and by simulation the
relationship between the solutions of the two systems.

In our work we focus on some specific physical systems, primarily from the
fields of acoustics and fluid dynamics. As such, we hope to enhance our
capability to use high-performance computing to predict the production and
interaction of sound with fluid flows. However, due to the general importance of
wave theory and the underlying unity of its mathematical description, most of
our results will be directly applicable in diverse areas such as
electromagnetism and elasticity. In the long term, an improved capability to
simulate waves will have important applications including the reduction of
aircraft noise, the improvement of radar and sonar imaging, the predictability
of the effects of earthquakes, and the design of better communications systems.








