
* 9971747
* RUI: Synthesis in Applications of Optimal Control
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/1999,05/21/1999
* Urszula Ledzewicz,IL,Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/2002
* USD 111,854.00

9971747 Ledzewicz

The project consists of two parts which both address the question of a regular
synthesis for optimal control problems arising in applications. In the first
part sufficient conditions for optimality of abnormal extremals will be
investigated in the context of field theory. A generalization of the
perturbation feedback control law that allows incorporating abnormal
trajectories into the classical framework will be used to construct a local
regular synthesis around an abnormal reference extremal. These constructions
should shed some light on the connections between optimal abnormal extremals and
singularities (including discontinuities) in the value function for the problem.
It is expected that this part of the project will contribute to both theory and
application of perturbation feedback control, regular synthesis, and sufficient
conditions of optimality by providing generalizations that complement the
classical results and become important new tools in applications. The second
part addresses precise and complete solutions to a class of nonlinear optimal
control problems in low dimensions arising in mathematical models for cancer
chemotherapy. In the models the cell cycle is controlled by clustering its
different phases into compartments and using phase specific killing agents. In
this project a full analysis of two- and three-compartment models will be
pursued. So far these models were only analyzed numerically, but no qualitative
or analytic results about the structure of optimal controls have been obtained.
It is expected that these results, interesting also from a theoretical point of
view, will find applications in mathematical models for scheduling cancer
chemotherapy protocols.

The project consists of two parts which both address the question of finding
full solutions to optimal control problems arising in applications. The first
construction is motivated by the perturbation feedback control scheme, a
classical tool in engineering, especially in aircraft control design. The
proposed construction aims to incorporate so-called abnormal trajectories for
which the conventional scheme is ineffective. It is expected that this part of
the project will contribute to both theory and application by providing
generalizations that complement the classical results and become important new
tools in applications. In the second part of the project models of optimal
control of cancer chemotherapy will be investigated. The goal is to maximize the
number of cancer cells that a cytostatic agent in the drug kills while keeping
the toxicity to the normal tissue acceptable. Some of the models that were only
analyzed numerically before will be investigated in this project with the aim of
obtaining a full analytic solution. It is expected that these results,
interesting also from a theoretical point of view, will find applications in
mathematical models for scheduling cancer chemotherapy protocols.
