
* 9971779
* Mathematical Issues in the Modeling and Simulation of Self-Consistent Charge Particle Transport
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1999,08/13/2000
* Irene Gamba,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2002
* USD 91,000.00

This research concerns mathematical problems in the theory of self-consistent
charged-particle transport systems at different scales. Of particular interest
is to address the mathematical issues in kinetic transport under strong forcing
(a high built-in electric field due to inhomogeneities of the flow region), and
the hierarchy of anisotropic hydrodynamic models derived under these conditions.
These models arise naturally when non-equilibrium current flow in heterogeneous
structures such as semiconductor devices is studied. Similar models are used to
describe biological transport in ionic channels, due to significant electrical
activity through cellular membranes. One of the new aspects of the planned
research is the mathematical and computational understanding of transition
layers that involve the linking of scales through kinetic and macroscopic levels
for transport models, both under low and high electric field effects. In both
cases, analytical studies are to be complemented by numerical simulation of
solutions of the corresponding model equations. This research addresses
mathematical models that are used to describe electron and ion transport in
semiconductors and in biological membranes. One of the main challenges comes
from the fact that in these phenomena, processes that occur at very different
length and time scale are coupled and influence each other. The mathematical
work will lead to faster computational methods for the simulation of such
phenomena which are at the same time more accurate. Technological areas which
are as different as microelectronics and pharmacology will ultimately benefit
from this work.


