
* 9971972
* A Proposal for Research in Waves in Random Media and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1999,08/17/1999
* George Papanicolaou,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2003
* USD 294,000.00

Papanicolaou 9971972 The goal of this project is to develop and use analytical
and computational methods for geophysical wave propagation. The investigator and
his colleagues have developed two general theories: one based around radiative
transport for elastic wave propagation in the crustal waveguide, and the other
based on waves in nearly layered random media. The mathematical issues involved
in radiative transfer are (i) the derivation of boundary conditions (ii) the
introduction and use of good Monte Carlo methods (iii) the solution of realistic
inverse problems for parameter identification. In the case of nearly layered
media an important mathematical issue is the robustness of wave localization,
known to hold for perfectly layered random media. Another direction of study is
the assessment of the effect of random inhomogeneities on time reversal imaging,
called wave migration in geophysics. The mathematical analysis requires time
domain statistics for time reversed pulses, which have to be constructed by
Fourier analysis. Theoretical explanations are provided for the increased
resolution in time reversal imaging due to the inhomogeneities. Geophysical wave
propagation, the propagation of seismic waves in the earth's crust for example,
requires mathematical modeling at several levels depending on the accuracy and
the resolution required. It is impossible to simulate numerically seismic wave
propagation over a few hundreds of kilometers of the earth's crust while taking
into account the detailed inhomogeneities in the earth's crust. Radiative
transport theory can be used very effectively and at much lower computational
cost, and it can provide estimates for the codas (tails) of seismograms with
enough accuracy to interpret and analyze many continental seismic events. The
project provides the mathematical methodology and infrastructure for using
radiative transport in geophysical problems. The investigator looks carefully at
what is needed to deal with discontinuities and interfaces in the crustal
environment, what is needed for large scale imaging from surface seismic
measurements, what is needed for assessing the waveguide effects that appear in
long distance seismic wave propagation, and what is needed for the effective
numerical simulation of long distance seismic wave propagation.


