
* 9971713
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1999,07/22/2003
* Daniel Phillips,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 12/31/2003
* USD 142,000.00

The principal investigator will study mathematical models for superconductivity
and liquid crystals. These materials are described by models posed at a variety
of length scales. The intent of the research is to investigate the qualitative
features of the solutions to these models, analyze the thresholds at which the
models predict change in the materials' basic characteristics (changes of phase)
and investigate the connections between the solutions of different models at
different length scales. The methods to be employed are analysis of partial
differential equations, asymptotic methods, homogenization, and numerical
simulation.

Superconductors are used in electronic sensing devices, magnets and power
transmission. Applications for liquid crystals are visual displays and optical
screens. These are examples of materials for which their characteristic features
(their phases) can change dramatically if subjected to electro-magnetic fields
or variations in temperature. This phenomenon is a great asset (essentially as
if one has two materials in the same location) but it is also a difficult
feature to control.The goal of the project is to add to the understanding of the
behavior of the models and their interrelations so that these materials can be
used more effectively. This will be done by means of mathematical analysis of
these models in general settings.


