
* 9971881
* Non-Steady Solutions of Models Describing Smoldering Combustion
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, CFS-Combustion & Fire Systems
* 08/01/1999,07/25/2002
* Daniel Schult,NY,Colgate University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2003
* USD 99,000.00

DMS - 9971881

Non-steady Solutions of Models Describing Smoldering Combustion

Daniel Schult

Colgate University

Abstract

Smoldering combustion refers to combustion in which the primary reaction process
involves both solid and gaseous reactants instead of the gas/gas reactions seen
in common flames. Smoldering often occurs when oxidizer supply to the reaction
is limited, for example because it must flow through porous media to reach the
reaction site. Models of smoldering combustion require a description of porous
fluid flow as well as a description of the reaction process. The resulting
partial differential equations are highly nonlinear, making description of
solutions difficult. Numerical simulations involving adaptive methods which
change resolution as the process evolves have been able to approximate steady
solutions to these models in some detail. Asymptotic methods have also been
successful in describing steady and slowly varying approximate solutions to
these models. The proposed project involves extending both asymptotic and
numerical methods to the study of non-steady solutions and then using these
techniques to describe the details of the dynamics and transitions of these
solutions. This project should be of interest to scientists using asymptotic
methods, using adaptive numerical methods, studying systems with multiple
solutions, interested in issues of stability of solutions with many time scales,
or interested in the development of chaotic solutions. It will be of particular
interest to fire safety experts who wish to understand dynamics of smoldering
near extinction limits, transitions from smoldering to flaming and patterns of
smolder propagation through materials.

Smoldering combustion is the burning of a solid without an airborne flame. It
is of interest for fire safety not only as a precursor to flaming, but also
because it tends to release large quantities of toxic gases. Smoldering is also
used in the design of timing devices (ignition fuses), and material synthesis
processes such as self-propagating high-temperature synthesis. Understanding the
mechanisms and processes behind smoldering can enhance fire safety as well as
allow better control for engineering uses of smoldering combustion. Models of
smolder processes involve highly nonlinear partial differential equations making
description of solutions difficult. Approximate descriptions exist for steady
uniform propagation and slowly varying propagation, but smoldering often
involves complicated non-steady behavior. Understanding the mechanisms which
drive this dynamical behavior should help us control smoldering systems and may
even allow design of desirable smolder dynamics. The proposed project involves
developing and extending high-performance computing algorithms as well as
analytical asymptotic methods to the study of non-steady smolder and then using
these techniques to describe the details of the dynamics and transitions of
these complex smolder waves. The solution methods introduced by this work and
the specific descriptions of the dynamics of smoldering will increase our
understanding of the smoldering process and transitions to flaming. In addition,
the techniques will likely be applicable in other areas of combustion and
problems of flow in porous media. This project should be of interest to
scientists using asymptotic methods, using adaptive numerical methods for high-
performance computing, studying systems with multiple solutions, interested in
issues of stability of solutions with many time scales, or interested in the
development of chaotic solutions. It will be of particular interest to fire
safety experts and combustion control engineers who wish to understand dynamics
of smoldering near extinction limits, transitions from smoldering to flaming and
patterns of smolder propagation through materials.
