
* 9972349
* A Mathematical Control Theory for the Partial Differential Equations of Thermal/Structure and Structural Acoustic Interactions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1999,07/13/1999
* George Avalos,TX,Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2001
* USD 80,946.00

9972349 Avalos

This project entails the mathematical analysis of control problems for those
systems of coupled partial differential equations (PDE's) known to govern
structural acoustic and thermal/structure interactions. In the first part of our
work, we will study the coupled hyperbolic and parabolic--like PDE's which model
structural acoustic systems under the action of unbounded pointwise observation
and control, with a focus here upon issues of optimization and exact boundary
controllability. In a particular structural acoustic, control design
application, pointwise boundary control is implemented for the purpose of
attenuating external noise in an acoustic chamber. Moreover, the efficacy of the
point boundary control is measured by point observations of the acoustic
pressure. Accordingly, the governing PDE model involves highly unbounded control
and observation operators. Before one can consider the optimal control of the
controlled and observed structural acoustic PDE, wellposedness of the dynamics
under the influence of these point observations and control must first be
established. This effort to establish regularity will require new techniques of
pseudodifferential analysis to establish microlocal PDE estimates that cannot be
obtained globally. Moreover, before optimization of the PDE system can proceed,
there must be an identification and characterization of a state space which
allows pointwise observations of the acoustic pressure. This effort to properly
characterize the state space will also have a heavy microlocal component.
Subsequently, we will consider various quadratic optimization schemes for the
structural acoustic PDE's under such point control and observation, with a view
toward developing a characterizing Riccati Equation and finite element
approximation of the optimal control laws. The second phase of the project
involves a continuation of our previous studies on controllability and stability
properties of a now classical system of thermoelasticity. In particular, we
attempt to extend a recent result of exact--approximate controllability to the
case where the coefficient of thermal volume expansion is allowed to vary with
the properties of the plate material. In addition, we will study the
longstanding problem of null controllability for the linear system of
thermoelasticity. Both these controllability investigations will employ novel
Carleman and pseudodifferential multipliers and techniques, as opposed to
standard differential multiplier methods. Nonlinear stabilization problems for
systems of thermoelasticity in the absence of rotational inertial will also be
considered.

The motivation for this project is drawn from the fact that the classes of
coupled PDE's to be considered frequently arise in the development and
application of smart materials technology. Loosely speaking, a "smart" material
or structure is that which has a miniaturized control system embedded within one
or more of its components, so as to induce a desired result or physical state.
For instance, this control system might function in such a way so as to negate
unwanted external influences, or to assist the material in attaining an optimal
shape (optimal with respect to some predetermined design specification).
Examples of such smart materials--- these comprising both sensor and actuator---
may be found in structural, structural acoustic, thermal/structure and
fluid/structure interaction systems. The mathematical modeling of these
composite structures will often culminate in the appearance of the
aforementioned coupled systems of PDE's. Moreover, inasmuch as the various
components of the control mechanism are typically affixed to the structure's
boundary, or embedded within its medium, and/or in collocation at specified
points of the structure, the associated system of PDE's which describes the
particular interaction will have a control input term present therein. The
principal intent of this project then is to obtain a better understanding and
foresight concerning the effect of active control on composite materials by
analyzing the behavior of their corresponding governing equations. In addition,
by performing rigorous numerical simulations on these PDE models, it is our
intent to generate approximate control laws that can be implemented for "real--
time" engineering control design.
