
* 9972147
* Innovative Finite Element Methods for Modeling Multiphase Contaminant Flows in Porous Media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, GLOBAL CHANGE, Hydrologic Sciences
* 09/01/1999,06/13/2001
* Richard Ewing,TX,Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2002
* USD 294,000.00

Ewing 9972147 Complex physical phenomena involving multiphase contaminant flows
and transport in porous media are often modeled by coupled systems of nonlinear
partial differential equations. Recent advances in computational capabilities
(particularly with the advent of new parallel architectures) have greatly
expanded the potential for incorporating more physics into the differential
equations. While such changes to the model can increase its ability to represent
accurately the underlying real process, this must be verified in each phase of
the modeling process utilizing physical, mathematical, numerical, and
computational concepts. The investigator and his colleague develop analytical
and numerical methods for the differential equations describing multiphase
contaminant flows and transport in porous media. The first objective is a
theoretical analysis of these nonlinear partial differential equations. Special
topics to be treated are regularity, stability, and bifurcation phenomena. The
second objective is to study and develop finite element methods capable of
capturing sharp solution fronts, producing accurate fluid velocities, conserving
mass, giving high-order approximations in time, and being efficiently adapted in
local grid refinement. Here the investigators develop finite element methods for
treating systems of nonlinear transport-diffusion equations via concepts of
Eulerian-Lagrangian localized adjoint methods and mixed finite element methods
coupled with high-order time-stepping procedures. The third objective is to
develop efficient parallelizable iterative solution techniques for the resulting
discrete problems. This project continues ongoing development of accurate
numerical techniques, efficient computational codes, and supporting mathematical
analysis for modeling of multiphase flows and transport in groundwater hydrology
that has applications in design of remediation and clean-up technologies. The
development of improved methods for assessing groundwater contamination by
hazardous wastes has become increasingly important. Indeed, groundwater supplies
are increasingly threatened by organic, inorganic, and radioactive contaminants
introduced into the environment by improper disposal or accidental release.
Estimates of remediation costs at U.S. government sites alone range into the
hundreds of billions of dollars. Protecting the quality of groundwater supplies
is a grand challenge problem of broad societal importance. There are also a
number of industrial applications of the proposed research. The production and
managment of oil reservoirs are governed by equations and technologies that are
nearly identical to those exploited in groundwater hydrology. The manufacture of
high quality fiber reinforced plastic composites for automotive and aerospace
application is controlled by technology similar to that studied in this project.
Design of semiconductors uses equations very analogous to those for groundwater
transport. In these areas, technology transfer can be easily carried out. In
particular, because of their intellectual content and strong links to industry,
this variety of problems provides an excellent vehicle for students to learn
techniques in applied and computational mathematics.


