
* 9972043
* Calculus of Variations in L-infinity and Nonlinear PDE's
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1999,07/27/1999
* Emmanuel Barron,IL,Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2002
* USD 106,200.00

9972043 Barron

The areas of proposed study of this project involve the multidimensional and
vector valued analogue of optimization problems with essential supremum cost
functional. In particular it is planned to consider the determination of the
necessary and sufficient conditions under which such functionals will possess a
minimizer. The project will also study homogenization problems involving these
functionals and representation theorems for the associated set functions.
Variational problems involving these functionals with constraints on the
minimizers will also be considered. The problems under study lead to very
nonlinear equations. The techniques to be used in this project will therefore be
nonlinear analysis involving dynamical systems, viscosity solutions for partial
differential equations, variational inequalities, and nonsmooth analysis.

The focus of this project is optimization of systems where one seeks to minimize
the worst that can occur. Examples where this is appropriate include the
following important problems: (1) Determine the shape of a load bearing beam so
as to minimize the maximum strains and stresses over the length of the beam. In
the past one designs the beam minimizing the total average energy, but cracks
may still occur. (2) Find a chemotherapy regimen for treatment of cancer seeking
to minimize the maximum tumor load. This is much more realistic than minimizing
the average tumor load. (3) Minimize the maximum noise in a reflected radar
beam. (4) Determine a control which will steer a trajectory as close as possible
to a target. (5) Find a portfolio that will maximize the minimum wealth over
some time period. These are all examples of significant and interesting problems
in which the appropriate point of view is the worst case scenario. They arise in
medicine, engineering, economics, and many other fields. Furthermore, the
analysis of the worst case gives the designer a benchmark on which to judge all
competing designs.
