
* 9972034
* Domain Decomposition in Control of Multiple Link Structures
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1999,04/29/1999
* John Lagnese,DC,Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2003
* USD 86,842.00

9972034 Lagnese

This research will explore optimal control, approximate controllability, and
exact controllability of systems of partial differential equations on one-
dimensional graphs or on two-dimensional polygonal networks by means of domain
decomposition. The basic idea of domain decomposition in this context is to
decouple the global optimality system through an iterative procedure on
individual elements, in which the couplings at the vertices and/or edges are
replaced by certain boundary conditions. At each iteration the local problems,
which are themselves local optimality systems, may be solved in parallel. The
choice of boundary conditions in the local problems must be such that, in
particular, the transmission conditions in the global optimality system are
restored in the limit of the iterations. The motivation for this approach is
twofold. On the one hand, controllability properties and optimal control laws
are more readily available at the local, subdomain, level. Consequently, there
is good reason to believe that it may be possible to construct suitable control
laws for the global system by local iterations, even in situations where such
control properties are not a priori known at the global level. On the other
hand, and perhaps more importantly, the approach is motivated by its numerical
potential. Complex, heterogeneous structures or media, after some
discretization, inevitably lead to very large systems to be solved numerically.
The transmission conditions in the global problems, which of course must be also
realized numerically, are very difficult to handle numerically at the global
level. It is very natural, therefore, to decompose such structures into their
canonical constituents, to discretize those and then run the computations in
parallel with the communications between elements taking place once an iteration
step is completed.

In many practical applications it is necessary to devise control laws to
regulate the dynamic behavior of structures such as trusses, frames, robot arms,
solar panels, antennae, airfoils or deformable mirrors that are comprised of
multiple interconnected flexible elements such as beams, membranes, plates,
shells or combinations thereof. This research will explore optimal control,
approximate controllability, and exact controllability of such structures by
means of domain decomposition. The basic idea of domain decomposition in this
context is to devise optimal control laws for the global structure through
iterations of optimal control laws on individual elements. At each iteration the
local control laws may be simultaneously obtained through parallel computations.
The motivation for this approach is twofold. On the one hand, controllability
properties and optimal control laws are more readily available for individual
flexible elements. Consequently, there is good reason to believe that it may be
possible to construct optimal control laws for the global structure by
iterations on individual control laws, even in situation where such control
properties are not a priori known at the global level. On the other hand, and
perhaps more importantly, the approach is motivated by its numerical potential.
Complex, heterogeneous structures or media, after some discretization, lead to
very large systems to be solved numerically. The coupling conditions among
individual elements that comprise the global structure are very difficult to
handle numerically at the global level. It is very natural, therefore, to
decompose such structures into their canonical constituents, to discretize those
and the then run the computations in parallel with the communications between
elements taking place once an iteration step is completed.
