
* 9972591
* On the Approximation of Linear Operators with Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
* 07/15/1999,07/06/1999
* Athanasios Antoulas,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2002
* USD 122,630.00

Abstract of project DMS-9972591: On the approximation of linear operators with
applications by A.C. Antoulas, Rice University
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The goal of this project is to investigate problems of approximation of linear
operators. The approximation method considered is based on the singular value
decomposition of the operator in question. More precisely, we propose to study
the existence of a unifying framework for the optimal and sub-optimal
approximation of (i) unstructured operators in finite dimensions, and (ii)
structured (Hankel) operators in infinite dimensions. It is expected that this
study will shed light on a large class of singular-value-decomposition based
approximation problems.

In order to predict the behavior of dynamical systems such as, a compact disc
(CD) player, a chemical reaction, or a multi-story building, and appropriately
modify (control) this behavior according to given specifications, a mathematical
model is needed. Often, (detailed) models for these dynamical systems can be
obtained using so-called finite-element methods. The resulting complexity of
such models is very high. However, for both simulation and control purposes low-
complexity models are needed, an important requirement being that these
simplified models retain key features of the original high-complexity systems.
The purpose of this project is to study approximation methods which yield low-
complexity models with (theoretically) guaranteed properties. This is a
necessary step towards addressing, in a second phase, the problem of control of
such dynamical systems. It is expected that this project, besides its
significance for mathematics, will have an impact on application problems
arising in several engineering disciplines, and on the theorerical foundations
of high performance computing.

Sub-project on internet based education ---------------------------------------

The advent of the internet is radically changing the way teaching is done at
universities. An important new concept in this regard is that of "Asynchronous
Learning", where students learn anytime, anywhere, and at their own pace, using
the internet. A key ingredient in this mode of learing is access to online
exercises, with the capability of instantaneous grading and feedback both for
the student and for the instructor. In traditional courses, the instructor gets
feedback on how well students have understood a certain concept at a later time,
when instruction has moved on to a new topic, and re-elaboration becomes
cumbersome. This issue can be addressed by making available online excercises
and tests which are graded instantaneously. Careful selection of the exercises
is required however, so as to help the beginner and challenge the advanced
learner. We propose to study the issue of "automatic problem generation and
grading" for a course in the broad area of linear algebra and dynamical systems.
We will start by reviewing and evaluating several existing methods for computer-
based generation and grading of assignemnts, for instance: (i) the "Mallard"
instructional environment developed at the University of Illinois, (ii) the
"Autodidact" instructional environment developed at the University of Grenoble;
the former is a general platform which can in principle be adapted to handle
many different courses, while the latter is geared towards courses in dynamical
systems and control. It will subsequently be decided whether to adopt one of
these existing platforms and/or the degree of modification required to address
the needs of the chosen course.


