
* 9972031
* Conservation Laws with Partial Dissipation in Continuum Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1999,07/21/1999
* Yanni Zeng,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/30/2002
* USD 55,000.00

This project is to study laws for continuum mechanics, describing the
conservation or balance of physical quantities such as mass, momentum, energy,
etc. The mathematical description of those laws are complicated nonlinear
systems of partial differential equations. The systems contain certain terms
representing the dissipative mechanism such as viscosity, heat conduction,
frictional damping, relaxation, species diffusion, etc. On one hand, the
nonlinearity of the systems tends to generating singularities (shock waves) in
the flows. On the other hand, the dissipative mechanism eases such a tendency,
but gives rise to richer wave patterns at the same time. The overall behavior of
the flows then depends on the competition between the two. The difficulty of the
problem lies in the fact that the dissipation exists only in certain equations
(laws) of a system. For instance, physics dictates that the conservation of mass
should not have any dissipation. Such a fact then further complicates the
competition between nonlinearity and dissipation. In different wave directions,
one or the other dominates. It is then easy to understand that in general there
is no explicit formula for a solution. In fact, even the existence of a solution
can be an open question. In this project, the awardee will study when a solution
can exist all the time. Furthermore, if a solution exists all the time, what is
its qualitative behavior? To this aim, the awardee will first reduce the system
into a set of simplified, decoupled equations. Each of them represents a wave
along a particular direction, and can be solved explicitly. These waves together
give the time asymptotic wave pattern of the original system. Next, the awardee
will study how well the asymptotic solution approximates the actual solution.
Through such a study, the understanding of the underlying physical phenomena can
be obtained.

The problems addressed in this research can be illustrated by an example. When a
space shuttle returns to the earth, the temperature of the air around it becomes
so high that the internal structure of the molecules in the air gets excited,
and chemical reactions occur. The air then loses its local thermodynamic
equilibrium state. The departure from equilibrium in turn provides the ``driving
force" for internal changes. The air relaxes towards its local equilibrium state
through molecular collisions. Such relaxation processes have significant
influence in the acoustic directions, but not the particle path direction. The
awardee will study how the relaxation processes change the overall behavior of
the air flow in this situation.


