
* 9972913
* Differential and Integral Equations in Physiology and Cell Biology
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, NEURAL SYSTEMS CLUSTER
* 09/01/1999,07/13/2001
* G. Bard Ermentrout,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2002
* USD 436,831.00

Ermentrout 9972913 The investigator continues work on the applications of
nonlinear dynamics to cell biology and physiology with particular emphasis in
neurophysiology. Specifically, the following problems are studied: 1. Analysis
of synaptic bistability; what is the dynamic mechanism by which two (and more)
mutually coupled neurons can maintain activity in absence of inputs? 2. How does
adaptation enhance the synchronization of excitatorily coupled neural
oscillators? 3. What determines the form and properties of ``lurching'' waves
that arise in systems of neurons that are coupled with delays as well as in
models of thalamic oscillations? 4. What is the effect of inhibition and slow
excitatory synapses on the propagation of waves in cortical slices? 5. How are
free and bound actin spatially distributed in the cell; is there any nontrivial
spatial dependence on the length distribution of the polymerized molecule? The
investigator studies how mathematical methods can be used to understand how
biological systems work. Specifically, he is interested in how nerve cells
interact with each other to produce activity that is related to behavior. For
example, when a person or animal holds something in short-term memory (like a
phone number) how does the relevant group of neurons stay on and what turns it
off? Mathematical models are created and mathematical techniques are used to
study these models in order to suggest new experiments. During normal and
abnormal behavior parts of the nervous system are capable of producing waves
that move across regions of the brain. The investigator is interested in what
factors determine the properties of these waves, such as their speed and shape.
Finally, he studies models of the components inside the cell that are
responsible for the cell's shape and how it moves around.


