
* 9972241
* Fully Convex and Nonlinear Control Theory
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1999,07/01/1999
* Peter Wolenski,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 46,000.00

9972241 Wolenski

The linear-quadratic model in control theory is the originator of many of the
powerful methods in engineering design, and it is still widely used in many
other disciplines as well. This is mainly because a solution to the problem can
be produced in a relatively easy way in a highly desirable form. Two major
drawbacks are that (1) not all systems can be adequately approximated by linear-
quadratic models and (2) the state space must be relatively small for efficient
implementation of the results. The fully convex model featured in this proposal
significantly broadens the applicable scope of the linear-quadratic paradigm
while still maintaining many of its attractive features. In particular, the
fully convex problem permits hard constraints on the control variables, a
situation often present in applications but not accounted for in the traditional
framework, and thus will partly appease the drawback (1). The proposal seeks to
unite modern trends in Hamilton-Jacobi theory with the fully convex control
model both theoretically and computationally. To alleviate (2), the proposal
seeks to develop efficient algorithms based on the rich convex duality
structure. A secondary objective involves a detailed analysis on aspects of
asymptotic stability of nonlinear systems, in particular the construction and
use of Lyapunov functions.

Optimal control theory is a mathematical discipline with far reaching
applications throughout science, engineering, economics, and industry. The
existing theory is constantly being challenged by these applications, which
subsequently provides motivation for the development of more sophisticated
mathematical tools. This proposal aims at making theoretical and computational
progress in a mathematical model that is widely used in applications but which
has by no means reached its full potential. The applicability of the proposed
goals would be an increase in the efficiency and a broadening of the scope of an
important standard modeling tool.
