
* 9973226
* Inverse Problems in Mathematical Finance: Exploring Bayesian Model Selection Algorithms
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/1999,08/16/2000
* Marco Avellaneda,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2003
* USD 224,999.00

Technical Description

This project explores information-theoretic ideas for solving model selection
problems in Mathematical Finance. Typically, these problems consist in the
specification of a diffusion measure, or more generally, a measure on path-
space, which describes the future states of the market. The data used in the
inversion consists of expected values of functionals, which correspond to
observed prices of "benchmark" securities. This problem is studied from the
point of view of partial differential equations and Monte-Carlo simulation. We
focus on model selection criteria based on minimizing the Kullback-Leibler
entropy distance between the unknown probability and a Bayesian prior. In the
special case of diffusion processes, this leads to a constrained stochastic
control problem that can be solved via Lagrange multipliers. In the case of
Monte Carlo simulation, one must construct appropriate weighted measures, in a
technique which is reminiscent of "importance sampling." These problems and
their generalizations to non-linear constraints will be studied in a unified way
using methods of Applied Mathematics and Numerical Analysis. The goal is to
achieve a better understanding of the question of model selection in Financial
Economics, which is crucial for the management of financial risk by quantitative
methods.

Non-Technical Description

This research proposal deals with the pricing and hedging of complex financial
instruments called derivative securities. The technology derived here, which is
based on the mathematical fields of probability, statistics and numerical
analysis, is used to develop accurate tools for pricing and managing complex
financial instruments. The motivation for this research comes from the fact that
quantitative finance offers many challenging mathematical and computer-related
problems. This is a consequence of the so-called "globalization'' phenomenon
that links different financial markets and economies throughout the world. The
current proposal deals with new mathematical methods for fine-tuning these
models. Our aim is to better understand how they work and how they represent
financial risk. By bringing to bear robust statistical methods and powerful
mathematical techniques, we expect to shed light on pricing and risk-management
systems and to develop better models that can be shared with the financial
industry. This is an important application of Mathematics to a new area of
research: quantitative finance. The proposal is part of a greater effort at New
York University's Courant Institute in the field of finance and markets. So far,
we have been successful in training young scientists that enter the business
arena with a unique set of professional skills. This suggests that such research
is both directly and indirectly suitable in terms of the larger picture of the
national economy.




