
* 9973944
* Biomathematical Approaches to Cancer Research
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1999,08/05/1999
* Evans Afenya,IL,Elmhurst University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2002
* USD 78,336.00

Afenya 9973944 The investigator develops mathematical models of several problems
arising in biology and medicine. These include studies of models of normal and
cancerous cells considered as interacting cell populations; investigations of
normal and cancer cell behavior in the bone marrow, blood, and the active and
resting phases of the cell cycle; studies of the inherent effects of time lags
in the development of the myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and cancer; and
studies of MDS and cancer from diffusion-oriented viewpoints. The treatment of
cancer and MDS is looked at as a formal optimization problem. Various functions
that represent medical and financial costs to patients during treatment are
derived and minimized or maximized subject to constraining ordinary differential
equations. Following this, techniques are developed for controlling model
equations that involve partial differential equations. Within this framework,
optimal strategies that address problems such as patient recuperation after
treatment, multidrug resistance, patient sensitivity to anticancer agents,
minimal residual disease, and low versus high dose continuous infusions are
considered. Statistical and probabilistic methods are used to manipulate and
study cancer data. From the data, model parameters that describe cell growth and
death rates are estimated by employing concepts of the growth fraction, cell
cycle and flow cytometric measurements, and apoptotic information. Techniques
are also developed for estimating other relevant model parameters, such as
measures of contact inhibition between cells, from data. The objectives of the
project include studies and modeling of precancerous syndromes and disseminated
cancers such as the leukemias and lymphomas from a biomathematical viewpoint.
The focus is on: a) Construction of mathematical models that quantitatively and
qualitatively shed light on mechanisms inherent in the precancerous syndromes
and disseminated cancers; b) Studies and comparisons of various treatment
protocols through the use of predictive treatment optimization models with the
view to suggesting ways in which treatment could be improved. Biomedicine is
becoming increasingly quantitative in scope and content as the fight against all
kinds of diseases such as cancer continues. Nevertheless, the use of
mathematical techniques that are well suited for analyzing, synthesizing, and
comprehending such quantitative information are relatively limited in this
important area. Also, clinicians and medical practitioners are always faced with
problems such as the exact length of time to carry out treatment, infusions of
the right amounts of drugs that are adequate for patient recovery, and overall
patient safety. These issues demand that the best treatment strategies be found
when dealing with patients in the clinic. The need also exists for
multidisciplinary approaches in tackling problems that continually arise in the
clinic. It is within these frameworks that mathematical modeling in the area of
biomedicine assumes significance and importance. The mathematical models serve
as a first line of approach and a cost-effective way of gaining insight into
cancer and MDS without initially resorting to expensive clinical trials. The
predictive nature of the models gives the clinician various options about the
specific way to proceed in dealing with the problems of the patient. It is
envisioned that knowledge gained from the research activities will aid in the
fight against cancer as a whole and have an impact on clinical trails of new
therapeutic strategies. Such knowledge will also have a positive impact on drug
delivery systems and the area of biomedical technology.
