
* 9973017
* Ecological Modeling: From Individual Utilization of Space to Community Structure
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1999,07/27/1999
* George Cosner,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2002
* USD 130,000.00

Cosner 9973017 The investigators study mathematical models for the dynamics of
spatially distributed biological populations. The goal of the project is to
provide a better theoretical understanding of how the spatial distribution and
movement of individuals affect the persistence or extinction of populations. The
motivation is to gain insight into the ways that spatial effects contribute to
the maintenance of biodiversity and the ways that changes in the spatial aspects
of the environment can threaten biodiversity. The project is primarily concerned
with the construction and analysis of models for edge-mediated effects and the
development of methods for translating assumptions about the behavior of
individuals on a small spatial scale into conclusions about the dynamics of
populations on a large spatial scale. Edge-mediated effects occur when the
presence of an interface between habitat types has an effect on population
dynamics. An example of an edge-mediated effect might occur if a fragment of
habitat were cut off from a larger region by a road that some species would
cross but others would not. If the presence of the edge (the road) thus resulted
in a change in the species composition of the ecological community in the
fragment, that would be an edge-mediated effect. Issues of scaling from local
behavior to large-scale conclusions arise in ecology because it is often
possible to determine small-scale behavior by observing a few individuals, while
directly observing the overall dynamics of a large population is much more
difficult. The methodology of the project is to construct mathematical models
for spatially distributed populations and then to analyze those models'
predictions of persistence or extinction for the species they describe. The
mathematical models are typically based on ordinary or partial differential
equations. The analysis typically involves ideas from dynamical systems,
nonlinear functional analysis (especially bifurcation theory), and partial
differential equations (especially comparison methods and elliptic spectral
theory). A secondary goal is to obtain new mathematical results that are useful
in the context of applications. The investigators study ways of using
mathematics to understand ecological problems. The problems mostly involve
spatial aspects of the environment; for example, how to design the most
effective nature reserves, or how to predict the likely effects of the
fragmentation of natural habitats on the populations that inhabit them. The
problems also involve interactions between different biological species, for
example predators and prey. The methodology is to express the essential features
of a biological system in terms of equations and then to study the equations to
determine what they predict. The analysis often requires the development of new
mathematical results, which may be of use to other investigators. A typical goal
of the analysis is to determine how various environmental and biological factors
affect the persistence or extinction of populations. A reason for using
mathematical models is that in situations involving endangered species,
genetically engineered organisms, or large scale environmental change, it is
often impossible to do experiments but crucial to have some idea of what to
expect. Some of the models are directly motivated by problems in refuge design
or pest control. Others are motivated by basic scientific questions about the
effects of the spatial aspects of environments on populations. But even those
may prove to be relevant to issues raised in the contexts of environmental
protection and the biological effects of global change. The potential benefits
of the project include improved decision making in conservation, refuge design,
land management, and urban planning.
