
* 9974389
* Modeling Host-Parasite Systems
* DMS,POP & COMMUNITY ECOL PROG, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, AMERICAS PROGRAM
* 08/15/1999,08/06/1999
* Zhilan Feng,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2003
* USD 221,000.00

Feng 9974389 The investigators and her colleagues study and analyze the complex
interactions between parasitic trematodes and their invertebrate and vertebrate
hosts by developing mathematical models that allow the prediction of changes in
the population dynamics of both hosts and parasites. Continuous deterministic
models based on systems of differential equations are proposed and analyzed
using the theory of dynamical systems and integral and differential equations.
Data gathered for the validation of the models is fitted using standard
statistical techniques. Validation of the simpler initial models is done by
taking the prevalence values of infection of human hosts at two or more points
in time, and estimating prevalence of infection at other points in time for
which data is available. A collaborative study is undertaken that combines the
theoretical and empirical experience of a parasitologist and the modeling and
theoretical expertise of mathematicians to investigate models of host-parasite
interactions. The scope of this project is threefold: *First, to model host-
parasite interactions, with increasingly complex models motivated by biological
considerations; *second, the study of mathematical properties of each model and
their biological and ecological implications such as population control or
potential species extinction; *third, the validation of the models through
comparison of model results with field data. This project significantly advances
our knowledge and understanding of the dynamics of host-parasite systems, by
providing usable models to study natural systems, by analyzing their sensitivity
to the parameters affecting their dynamics, and by allowing the structuring of
the complexities of the systems into hierarchies. A specific example is the
determination of the proportion of cases of schistosomiasis that need to be
treated for the disease to be eradicated, as well as the effect of drug-induced
parasite mutation and the existence of more than one species of definitive hosts
on the dynamics of transmission of this ailment. Just as important is the
possibility of extending the models developed in this project to more complex
systems involving three or more species, or stochastic environmental
variability.
