
* 9974116
* Models for Wave-Bottom Interaction and the Formation of Sand Bars and Sand Ridges
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, SCEC
* 08/15/1999,08/13/1999
* Jerry Bona,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2001
* USD 90,600.00

Bona 9974116 The overall technical objective of the project is to develop three-
dimensional topographical models that describe seabed dynamics in wave-dominated
near-shore zones and shelf regions where single and multiple sand bars or sand
ridges form a central morphological feature. The investigator models and
analyses the effects of waves and currents on coastal dynamics. This is
challenging because of the presence of two free surfaces, the water surface and
the movable bottom, both of which change over time, and which interact with each
other through complex, nonlinear processes. The model features nonlinear,
dispersive, dissipative partial differential equations to describe the evolution
of waves coming in to the shore from deep water. These equations, which are of
Boussinesq type, are coupled to a model for run-up and reflection at the
shoreline. Once the evolution of the water surface is approximately known, the
velocity field in the bulk of the fluid may then be determined via potential
theory. This velocity field is then viewed as driving a viscous, sediment-laden
boundary layer in which the sediment transport is taking place. The velocity
distribution in this layer is determined using ideas similar to those pioneered
by Longuet-Higgins. By applying conservation of sediment mass in an
infinitesimal form, a differential equation is thereby inferred that serves to
determine the bottom deformation. Thus the entire model is somewhat complicated,
consisting of a nonlinear initial-boundary-value problem for the wave motion
coupled in a nonlocal way to a conservation law for the bottom movement. This
model is developed in detail, analysed and implemented as a computer code. Model
predictions are compared with field data. It is also proposed to link the
computer code with input from a Geographical Information System, to allow easier
deployment of the model in real situations. The underlying motivation for the
project is two-fold. First, there is a desire to understand both qualitatively
and quantitatively some of the fundamental processes that lead to the formation
and maintenance of bottom structure in coastal zones and on continental shelves.
This involves a thorough knowledge of both the wave environment and the dynamics
of the bed as it is influenced by waves and by currents. Second, and not less
important, the project responds to the need for new and more sophisticated tools
to aid in the development of strategies to deal with real coastal engineering
problems. The project has the potential to contribute to the study of a number
of important scientific and environmental issues. The ocean margins in North
America are vast and in many places, troubled. Indeed, erosion of unconsolidated
coastlines is a world-wide phenomenon that is not well understood. Global
warming will aggravate these problems by increasing sea levels, thus causing
shore retreat and providing a better base for the scour and erosion associated
with wave activity. Fragile Arctic coasts and low-altitude regions are already
displaying unmistakable signs of deterioration caused by these global changes.
Severe erosion may well spread to other coast regions within the next half
century, and thus there will be an increased interest in effective prevention
methods. In addition to "hard" protection schemes such as the construction of
seawalls and the like, there will be an increased demand for "soft" protection
strategies that take advantage of natural processes.
