
* 9983708
* CAREER: Development, Analysis, Implementation, and Application of Innovative Structure Preserving Integrators for Constrained Systems in Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2000,04/11/2000
* Laurent Jay,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

9983708 Jay

This work is supported by a National Science Foundation Faculty Early Career
Development Award. This project is concerned with the numerical solution of
differential-algebraic equations (DAEs) of constrained systems in mechanics. The
model equations of numerous problems in mechanics take the form of DAEs, not of
ordinary differential equations (ODEs). The numerical integration of these DAEs
is notoriously difficult, mainly due to the presence of geometrical and/or
kinematic constraints. The main research and development objectives of this
project are to develop, analyze, implement, and apply numerical methods and
techniques related to the numerical integration of these DAEs. The methods
proposed, which are based on Runge-Kutta type methods, make great use of the
structure of the DAEs considered and they are perfectly fitted to preserve their
underlying properties. Several applications in the following areas will be
considered: rigid and flexible multibody dynamics; flight formation of multiple
coordinated spacecraft; classical molecular dynamics. The educational and
research aspects of this project are intertwined. Graduate students will write
their M.Sc. or Ph.D. thesis as part of the project. They will spend part of
their time with partners in industry and in research laboratories/centers. New
courses closely related to the project will be created.

What is common between a spacecraft, a DNA loop in a gel, the landing gear of an
aircraft, the suspension system of a truck, and a molecule colliding with
another one? They are all examples of systems in mechanics (a branch of physics)
whose motion can be mathematically modeled by certain sets of equations called
"differential-algebraic equations". Being able to simulate these systems on a
computer can have various impacts depending on the applications considered.
Vehicle-system simulation can help improve research in vehicle safety and
vehicle development. Mechanical system simulation software enables users to
relatively quickly analyze multiple design variations, thereby reducing the
number of costly physical prototypes, improving the quality of the design, and
reducing product development time. The concept of having multiple coordinated
spacecraft has been identified as an enabling technology for many of the NASA's
21st century missions. The accurate simulation of coordinated spacecraft before
they are actually sent can help reduce the risk of mission failure.
Understanding the mechanics of DNA, which is at the heart of life, can have some
fundamental potential medical benefits. Understanding the collision dynamics of
molecules can help to delineate the parameters that are important in the energy
transfer process, so that unwanted byproducts and pollutants in chemical
reactions can be reduced. Those are all examples of possible impacts that this
research can have in the different application areas that will be considered.
The work primarily in designing and developing tools that will enable the
accurate and efficient simulation of those "constrained systems in mechanics".

The National Science Foundation strongly encourages the early development of
academic faculty as both educators and researchers. The Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Program is a Foundation-wide program that provides for the
support of junior faculty within the context of their overall career
development. It combines in a single program the support of quality research and
education in the broadest sense and the full participation of those
traditionally underrepresented in science and engineering. This program enhances
and emphasizes the importance the Foundation places on the development of full,
balanced academic careers that include both research and education.
