
* 9986658
* Mathematical Problems in Compressible Fluid Flow
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2000,04/30/2002
* David Hoff,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2003
* USD 159,000.00

9986658 Hoff

This is a proposal to study various questions relating to the existence,
stability, regularity, and large-time behavior of solutions of certain partial
differential equations arising in the theory of viscous, compressible fluid
flow. Previous work on the existence of discontinuous solutions of the Navier-
Stokes equations in three space dimensions will be extended to finite regions,
requiring new insight into the production of compressible vorticity at
boundaries. A rigorous analysis of the propagation of singularities and the
regularity of discontinuity surfaces in solutions of these equations will be
given. A continuous-dependence theory will be developed, sufficient to provide a
framework in which numerical procedures for approximating solutions can be
studied. The dimension of the attractor for the Navier-Stokes equations in one
space dimension will be estimated in terms of the size of the applied force and
scale-invariants of the system. Finally, previous work on the multidimensional
stability of large-amplitude viscous shocks for scalar conservation laws will be
extended to the more applicable case of systems.

The proposer will study various mathematical questions concerning important
models of compressible fluids and materials. These models arise in a broad range
of applications, including supersonic flight, dynamic meteorology, semiconductor
theory, and the design and use of viscoelastic materials. While the main goal in
constructing these models is to achieve a predictive capability, they are far
too complicated to be "solved" in any explicit sense. On the other hand,
adequate approximate solutions can frequently be generated by computer methods.
The intelligent design of such methods depends crucially, however, on a rigorous
understanding of why solutions do exist, in what sense, and in what ways they
are sensitive to noise in the data. The primary goal of this project is
therefore to provide such a rigorous mathematical analysis for these models.
