
* 9987636
* Problems in Muldimensional and Nonlinear Systems Theory
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2000,08/07/2000
* Joseph Ball,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2003
* USD 81,098.00

9987636 Ball

A fundamental object of study since the 1960s from a number of points of view
has been that of a ``Schur-class function'' and its operator-valued
generalizations, i.e., a holomorphic function defined on the unit disk whose
values are contractive operators mapping one Hilbert space to another. Schur-
class functions arise as the characteristic function for a contraction operator
in the operator-model theory of Livsic-Brodskii, Sz.- Nagy-Foias and de Branges-
Rovnyak, as the transfer function of a unitary colligation (or energy-conserving
discrete-time, input-state-output linear system), and as the scattering function
of a discrete-time scattering system in the sense of Lax-Phillips and Adamjan-
Arov. A major theme of the project is to develop this same confluence of ideas
for various multivariable systems. In the first such multivariable setting, the
generalized Schur-class function is analytic and contractive on the unit
polydisk in multidimensional complex Euclidean space, and is the transfer
function of an energy-conserving multidimensional system of the type considered
by Roesser. The geometry of which scattering systems actually arise from a
conservative Roesser input-state-output system lends insight into which
contractive functions on the polydisk satisfy a von Neumann inequality (i.e.,
induce a functional calculus which maps tuples of commuting contraction
operators to another contraction operator). In the second incarnation, the
generalized Schur-class function is a power series in finitely many noncommuting
variables, and is the transfer function for a system with time parameter taken
to lie in a free semigroup with finitely many noncommuting generators. This
analysis will give additional insight (on the system and scattering theory side)
to recent work on model theory for row contractions and function theory on the
ball in multidimensional complex Euclidean space. In the third incarnation, the
generalized Schur-class function is actually a contractive bundle map between
two parahermitian bundles defined over an algebraic curve embedded in complex
Euclidean space. This analysis will lead to a discrete-time version of the
Livsic multivariable system theory and a model theory for commuting tuples of
nonunitary operators, as well as another multivariable scattering theory.
Finally, the project includes an application of some of these ideas to nonlinear
settings, specifically, the development of a nonlinear H-infinity control theory
for nonlinear systems with stopping cost, switching cost, and/or boundary state-
space constraints.

The notion of an energy-conserving (or more generally, dissipative) system has
long been a fundamental notion in a number of disciplines (e.g., classical and
quantum mechanics and circuit theory). A more recent generalization of this
notion allows interaction of the system with an outside environment through
input and output signals, and the enlargement of the energy bookkeeping to take
into account energy exchange with the outside environment. This notion in turn,
together with the function and operator theory associated with it, has been
fundamental in recent advances in the theory of robust control, where the
engineer seeks to design a feedback control to guarantee satisfactory
performance of a system even in the presence of unmodeled disturbances in the
outside environment and/or modeling errors in the mathematical description of
the system. The goal of this project is to push these ideas in fundamental, new
directions, namely: (1) new types of multidimensional systems and scattering,
and (2) nonlinear systems with discontinuities arising from (a) instantaneous
switching of the control setting, or (b) instantaneous jumps in the state
dynamics caused by boundary reflections. The first direction has direct
application to systems that evolve in both time and in a spatial dimension, as
well as to uncertain systems with a modeled parameter- variation uncertainty and
certain types of nonlinear systems. The second direction is relevant to physical
systems where instantaneous jumps occur between two or more continuous-model
descriptions (hybrid systems) (such as in the setting of a traffic signal at a
highway intersection), as well as to systems where the set of admissible values
for some physical quantity has a boundary which leads to a boundary reflection
in the system description (such as the constraint that the queue lengths be
nonnegative in a queueing network).
