
* 0071729
* Problems in surface theory/ membranes/hypersurface singularities
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2000,09/01/2000
* Brian Smyth,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2003
* USD 60,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0071729 Principal Investigator: Brian Smyth

This proposal is predominantly concerned with qualitative aspects of the theory
of surfaces as well as its application to the construction of a complete theory
of equilibria for the general elastic membrane. The work on surface theory is
uncovering previously unsuspected qualitative behavior of the principal
foliations near an isolated singularity (umbilic) in a smooth surface in space,
which strikingly distinguishes them from general foliations. This behavior
explains the Caratheodory conjecture and, in many cases, proves the conjecture
as a mere numerical consequence. The work on elastic membranes establishes the
equilibrium equation of the most general stretched elastic membrane in
equilibrium under an applied force field --- a far-reaching generalization of
the classical Young-Laplace equation which was only valid for isotropic
membranes. The context for this work is the unit circle bundle of the membrane
surface equipped with the canonical lift (Sasaki metric) of the induced metric
on the membrane surface; the key idea is the construction of a vector-valued
1-form on this bundle which completely encodes the responding forces of surface
tension set up within the membrane.

Surfaces are mathematical entities which are fundamental to the understanding of
the structure of matter in physics, chemistry and biology. The surface at the
interface of two different types of matter is frequently modeled by an elastic
membrane. An observer of an elastic membrane in equilibrium can see the shape of
the membrane, understand the forces that are being applied and even measure the
average surface tension but has no idea of the responding forces of surface
tension set up within the membrane. This work reveals the precise relationship
between these observables and the internal surface tension forces for the
general membrane. It follows that the response is never entirely predictable
from the observables (membrane geometry, applied force, average surface tension)
but that a certain core behavior is determined --- except for a very remarkable
family of membranes (whose exceptional nature is defined solely by their
geometry and not their physics) which live by a different set of rules. By
example, it is shown that the common ad hoc assumptions of isotropy are
seriously flawed. The authors' work on the principal foliations of surfaces has
already provided a key result which has been applied by Rozoy to settle a long-
standing problem on the symmetry of a liquid ball in general relativity, as well
as relating streamlines of a plane fluid flow to surface theory.
