
* 0071393
* Recursive formulas for Gromov-Witten invariants
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2000,06/01/2000
* Eleny-Nicoleta Ionel,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2003
* USD 171,312.00

Award: DMS-0071393 Principal Investigator: Eleny-Nicoleta Ionel

The goal of the first project is to obtain new relations in the cohomology of
the moduli space of complex structures on a marked Riemann surface. Using
techniques developed in her earlier work, the PI found several interesting
relations, one of which could prove the Faber conjecture about the generators of
the tautological ring. The second project seeks to find relations between the
relative and absolute Gromov-Witten invariants. Such relations appear to be
useful in mirror conjecture computations, as well as in several other open
problems in enumerative geometry. The final project suggests two ways of
extending the Gromov-type invariants to `nongeneric' situations. This would
provide more refined information about the symplectic manifold. Most of the
problems in enumerative algebraic geometry are more than a hundred years old.
The questions are easy to ask, but the progress in solving them using classical
methods has been quite slow. Recently, the same kind of questions arised in two
dimensional topological quantuum field theories from high energy physics.
Inspired by these theories, new methods lead in the past couple of years to
amazing progress in the field. The proposal explores two new ways of approaching
these old problems that would further clarify the structure of the two
dimensional topological quantuum field theories.
