
* 0072492
* The Gromov-Witten invariants of curves, surfaces, and 3-folds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2000,05/22/2002
* Jim Bryan,LA,Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 93,891.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0072492 Principal Investigator: Jim A. Bryan

This project is primarily concerned with Gromov-Witten invariants. The
investigator will study the Gromov-Witten invariants of a 3-fold X by
determining the local contributions of a suitably rigid curve C in X. In
particular, the investigator will study the integrality properties of such
contributions and their relationship to the number of certain BPS states in
M-theory as defined via the formula of Gopakumar and Vafa. For nodal curves C,
the investigator will continue his work with Katz and Leung; for smooth higher
genus curves C, the investigator will continue work begun with R. Pandharipande.
In collaborations with Leung, the investigator will also seek to define a new
invariant of symplectic 4-manifolds which would specialize to the modified
Gromov-Witten invariants defined by Behrend and Fantechi for algebraic surfaces
with positive geometric genus (which in turn generalized the modified invariants
defined by the investigator and Leung for K3 and Abelian surfaces). Such an
invariant would be better suited to study the enumerative geometry of irrational
surfaces than the ordinary Gromov-Witten invariants.

In the physics of string theory, particles are replaced with one-dimensional
objects (``strings'') and so the path that a particle traces out over time
becomes a surface in space-time (a ``world-sheet''). The equations of string
theory then tell us that the surface should be a holomorphic surface (a Riemann
surface) mapped into space-time in a holomorphic manner. This has led to the
purely mathematical notion of Gromov-Witten invariants. Gromov-Witten invariants
study holomorphic mappings of Riemann surfaces into higher dimensional geometric
objects (for example, projective manifolds). They have become important
invariants in geometry, topology, and algebraic geometry as well as being
central in string theory. Bryan's project specifically addresses the problem of
how the algebraic geometry of a projective manifold is encoded in the Gromov-
Witten invariants and how they are tied to string theory. Algebraic geometry is
a classical subject in pure mathematics that has recently found application in
such diverse subjects as robotics and coding theory; string theory is the
leading candidate for a "theory of everything", i.e. a single physical theory
that describes all known physical phenomenon.
