
* 0072171
* Geometric Structures in Poisson Geometry and Quantization
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/2000,06/29/2001
* Ping Xu,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2003
* USD 113,903.00

DMS-0072171 Ping Xu

This project involves the study of Poisson structures using the theory of Lie
groupoids and Lie algebroids, in particular, Poisson groupoids and Lie
bialgebroids. The theory of Poisson groupoids was developed as a unification of
both Drinfel'd's Poisson group theory and the theory of symplectic groupoids of
Karasev-Weinstein. The investigator aims to apply this theory to study
integrable systems such as Calogero-Moser systems. He will also continue his
study on Courant algebroids and Dirac structures from the viewpoint of Dirac
generating operators, as applied to objects in Poisson geometry such as moment
maps and equivariant cohomology. This project also involves the study of
deformation quantization, in particular on quantum groupoids. More specifically,
it includes the study of universal enveloping algebras of Courant algebroids,
Kontsevich's formality type conjecture for Lie algebroids, and cohomology theory
of deformation of Hopf algebroids, all of which are components in quantization
of Lie bialgebroids. An important application is to study quantization of
classical dynamical r-matrices.

Poisson geometry is largely motivated by physics, which is in fact a
mathematical tool used to give a theoretical framework encompassing large parts
of classical mechanics. Quantization is developed in order to gain a better
understanding between classical mechanics and quantum mechanics. At present,
Poisson geometry finds various applications including control theory, machining
automation and robotic manipulation.


