
* 0072483
* Harmonic Maps and Minimal Surfaces into Spaces of Curvature Bounded from Above
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2000,08/31/2000
* Chikako Mese,CT,Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

DMS-0072483 Chikako Mese

The principal investigator proposes to study geometric variational problems,
with particular emphasis on harmonic maps in spaces with singularities.
Motivated by questions in geometry and algebra, the study of harmonic maps to
singular targets, particularly metric spaces of curvature bounded from above,
has attracted the attention of many mathematicians. In particular, many
remarkable results have been obtained by Gromov-Schoen, Korevaar-Schoen, and
Jost. The PI proposes to develop the minimal surface theory as a continuation of
the study of the harmonic map theory. The PI has shown that minimal surfaces in
metric spaces of curvature bounded from above generalize several important
properties of the classical minimal surfaces. We are interested in the
development of a higher dimensional analogue of the theory advanced thus far.
The PI will also investigate harmonic maps between surfaces when the target is
given a metric of curvature bounded from above. We are particularly interested
in understanding the behavior of harmonic maps when the target metric has
singularities associated with curvature concentrations. Furthermore, we hope to
gain an understanding of the behavior of harmonic maps when we vary the target
metrics in a certain class. This in turn will be used to study Teichmuller
spaces.

The mathematical study of harmonic maps is natural and physically significant.
This is because physics dictates that most natural actions occur in a way to
minimize certain quantities. For instance, it is well known that the path of
light in space is affected by gravity, and this path can be realized by a curve
which minimizes arclength with respect to a certain metric. A thin film (such as
a soap film formed on a closed wire frame) will come to a configuration which
minimizes the surface area. Both these configurations can also be represented by
energy minimizing maps. As critical points of the energy functional, harmonic
maps are mathematical models of natural phenomena and provide an interesting
mathematical study.


