
* 0072675
* Geometry and Physics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 07/15/2000,04/08/2002
* Daniel Freed,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2003
* USD 622,845.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0072675 Principal Investigator: Daniel S. Freed

The geometry group at the University of Texas proposes to carry out a variety of
research projects, most of which are related to physics. Dan Freed's current
research focuses on questions in geometry and topology arising from string
theory. These include the construction of determinant line bundles on manifolds
with boundary and the understanding of anomalies of actions which arise in
quantizing lagrangian field theories. Karen Uhlenbeck's current research
involves the geometric theory of integrable systems, as well as a non-linear
Schroedinger equation arising in macroscopic theories of a ferro-magnetic
continuum. These two researchers are starting a project aimed at understanding
the appearance of integrable systems in conformal field theories. Bob Williams
is applying his expertise on attractors to the construction of tiling spaces.
Constantin Teleman is pursuing several projects in the cohomology of infinite
dimensional Lie Algebras. He and his coworkers are making progress on the
MacDonald conjectures, and are also giving geometric interpretations in terms of
the Hodge cohomology of flag varieties of loop groups. He is also interested in
homotopy equivalences between holomorphic and continuous mapping spaces.
Postdoctoral members of the group are Nurit Krausz, who is working on direct
computations for quantum field theory in Minkowski space, and Adrian Vajiac who
uses equivariant localization techniques to study topological quantum field
theories.

At this point in time, geometry is a rapidly developing area of mathematics.
While research in geometry, like most of pure mathematics, consists of the
construction and development of abstract concepts, the origins and ultimate
applications for these constructions are invariably examples and applications in
more applied fields. The influence of theoretical physics on geometry is strong.
For example, large numbers of geometers are currently working on questions
related to quantum groups, mirror symmetry and quantum cohomology. Our group
attempts not to work on problems which have already been identified by
mathematicians as central, but in contrast we look at current ideas in physics
of all sorts and then find, clarify, and work on the mathematically interesting
questions more directly. Dan Freed's work on string theory connects the physics
ideas of quantization with the mathematical subject of algebraic topology. His
joint project with Karen Uhlenbeck on the appearance of integrable systems in
certain quantum field theories requires an understanding of field theory,
integrable systems, and the very important and basic ideas of symmetry.
Constantin Teleman's work deeply involves fundamental ideas of symmetry, as well
as delving into the question of how closely very messy functions can be
approximated qualitatively by polynomial-like objects. Some of the geometric
ideas come from other branches of physics, such as the ferro-magnetic equations
studied by Uhlenbeck. The tiling spaces of William's come from beautiful
examples such as those constructed by Roger Penrose. Our efforts bring new ideas
and techniques into mathematics, rather than concentrating on projects which are
already popular.
