
* 0072202
* Periodic Orbits of Hamiltonian Systems, Cobordisms and Geometric Quantization, and Poisson Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2000,06/01/2000
* Viktor Ginzburg,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2004
* USD 133,679.00

DMS-0072202 Viktor L. Ginzburg

The present proposal focuses on several long-term projects and continues
principal investigator's previous work funded by an NSF grant. The first
question addressed in the proposal is the Hamiltonian Seifert conjecture or,
more specifically, the existence problem for Hamiltonian dynamical systems
without periodic orbits on a sequence of regular energy levels. The Hamiltonian
Seifert conjecture is closely related to the next group of questions considered
in the proposal. These questions lie in the area of symplectic topology and
concern the existence of periodic orbits for Hamiltonian systems describing the
motion of a charge in a magnetic field. The second part of the proposal includes
a series of problems in Poisson geometry. Among these problems are, for example,
the existence questions for equivariant Poisson moment maps and the construction
of Poisson traces corresponding to the leaves of the symplectic foliation. A
general program relying on applications of equivariant cobordisms to the study
of Hamiltonian actions of compact groups is the subject of the concluding part
of the proposal.

Hamiltonian dynamical systems describe many classes of physical processes in
which dissipation of energy can be neglected. For example, planetary motion in
celestial mechanics and some electro- or magneto-dynamical processes can be, and
usually are, treated as Hamiltonian dynamical systems. One of the classical
subjects in the theory of dynamical systems is the study of periodic orbits
(i.e. cyclic motions). Periodic motion is the simplest and most common type of
motion after equilibrium. It is believed that a vast majority of Hamiltonian
systems have periodic orbits. The first problem addressed in the proposal is the
construction of Hamiltonian systems without periodic orbits. This is a question
of considerable importance for the theory of Hamiltonian dynamical systems
because examples of such systems would further advance our understanding of
Hamiltonian dynamics. The next problem concerns the existence of periodic orbits
for Hamiltonian systems describing the motion of a charge in a magnetic field.
This class of Hamiltonian systems naturally arises in applications in physics
and mechanics. However, few of the extremely powerful general methods that have
been recently developed in symplectic geometry are applicable to this class of
systems. The investigation of these systems should extend the limits of existing
methods and result in the development of novel ones. Other problems considered
in the proposal concern the study of connections between geometrical properties
of classical-mechanical systems and certain quantum-mechanical phenomena.
