
* 0072508
* Topological Field Theory and Integrable Systems
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2000,10/30/2003
* Ezra Getzler,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2006
* USD 249,951.00

DMS-0072508 Ezra Getzler

The Gromov-Witten invariants of a compact symplectic manifold are the
correlation functions of a two-dimensional topological gravity with background
V. These invariants generalize such enumerative invariants of algebraic geometry
as the number of curves of genus g and degree d through 3d+g-1 points in the
plane. For each genus g, the genus g Gromov-Witten potential of V is the
generating function of the genus g Gromov-Witten invariants. This project
intends to study the differential equations satisfied by these potentials and
their geometric significance. The genus zero Gromov-Witten potential satisfies
the Witten-Dijkgraaf-Verlinde-Verlinde equation, which finds its geometric form
in Dubrovin's theory of Frobenius manifolds. Previous work of the PI has shown
that the genus one Gromov-Witten potential satisfies a differential equation
defined on any Frobenius manifold. Moreover, Dubrovin and Zhang have shown that
this equation has a unique solution for any semisimple Frobenius manifold. The
PI proposes to investigate analogous situation for genus g greater than one and
its manifold consequences.

It is well known that there is one line through two points in the plane.
Similarly, there is one quadratic curve through three points in the plane. The
theory of Gromov-Witten invariants is a tremendous generalization of this: one
generalizes from lines to general algebraic curves, and from the plane to more
general spaces. The resulting counting problems are related to the theory of
such integrable systems as the Kortweg-de Vrijs equation describing waves in
shallow water. In this project, following ideas of Dubrovin and Zhang, we
attempt to understand this link better. Thus, this project investigates
significant and surprising developments in enumerative geometry that were
originally motivated physics, and potentially should cast light on a number of
questions of relevance to modern physics.


