
* 0072299
* Spectral Theory and Geometry of Locally Symmetric Spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/2000,06/12/2000
* Lizhen Ji,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2004
* USD 107,389.00

DMS-0072299 Lizhen Ji Symmetric and locally symmetric spaces are important
objects in mathematics and arise from many different subjects such as Lie group
theory, representation theory, number theory, differential geometry, algebraic
geometry, and dynamics. Many natural such spaces are noncompact. For example,
the space of positive definite matrices of determinant one is a noncompact
symmetric space, and the moduli space of all elliptic curves is a noncompact
locally symmetric space of finite volume which is one example of Shimura curves
and plays an important role in the recent solution of the last Fermat's theorem.
To understand the geometry and analysis of such noncompact spaces, an important
problem is to study their compactifications. One of the common themes of the
four projects in this proposal is to understand refined structures of the
compactifications and their relations to the spectral theory of the spaces. For
example, for locally symmetric spaces, geodesics which are eventually distance
minimizing can be used to study the compactifications and also to understand the
generalized eigenfunctions of the continuous spectrum, specifically, the
scattering matrices. Compactifications of symmetric spaces play an important
role in understanding behaviors at infinity of the joint eigenfunctions of the
invariant differential operators and the matrix coefficients of representations.
The compactifications of globally and locally symmetric spaces have mainly be
studied separately before, and an important feature of this proposal is to study
compactifications of both types of spaces using a similar approach.

Mathematicians study geometric shapes and their structures. One such collection
of shapes consists of objects called manifolds. If a drum is pictured as a
particular type of manifold then the tones produced by the drum can be thought
of as mathematical objects associated to the manifold. For a particularly
important collection of drums there are two kinds of tones: the discrete (or
isolated) ones and the continuous families. The PI intends to investigate a
variety of mathematical structures on these drums or manifolds.
