
* 0072153
* A new method for global analysis of manifolds asymptotic to partially hyperbolic tori in near-integrable Hamiltonian systems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2000,07/20/2000
* Michael Rudnev,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2001
* USD 76,068.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0072153 Principal Investigator: Michael Rudnev

Global dynamics in near-integrable Hamiltonian systems with several degrees of
freedom will be studied. The research aims to progress towards proving the
conjecture about the existence of a generic topological instability in such
systems, known as "Arnold's diffusion", effected via resonances. The first goal
is to obtain an adequate local description of various geometric objects that the
perturbation causes to appear. These objects can be characterized by their
rotation vectors. First, they are lower-dimensional partially hyperbolic
(whiskered) tori and the Lagrangian manifolds (whiskers) asymptotic to these
tori. Generally, the collection of all the rotation vectors yielding whiskered
tori form a set of the first category. Rotation numbers in the "gaps" in it
describe so-called "Aubry-Mather sets". Yet the latter term is somewhat obscure
beyond the case of two degrees of freedom. Incorporating many of the above
mentioned objects of all types into a single global geometric framework effected
as an atlas over the phase space, is the second, and the main goal. Apropos of
"Aubry-Mather sets", this will require mutual interpretation of the results
obtained via variational methods of Lagrangian mechanics and geometric implicit
function theorems, such as KAM, of Hamiltonian approach.

The proposed research focuses on instability as a generic feature of complex
mechanical systems, be it the Solar system, or a polyatomic molecule. In order
to describe such, one needs to know the present state of the system, and the
equations of its future evolution. Typically, due to their complexity, one
cannot obtain the solutions of these equations with the initial conditions
incorporated. Otherwise, and this is an exceptional case, the system is called
integrable. Such would be the Solar system if one considers only the interaction
of each individual planet with the Sun, disregarding in particular the mutual
gravitational attraction between the planets, etc. Yet the laws of motion are
known exactly, the initial state of a system has to be measured, which leads to
errors, however small. The hypothesis of instability, alias "Arnold's
diffusion," suggests that two infinitesimally different initial conditions may
result in two qualitatively different scenarios ad infinitum. In particular,
this is believed to be true for small perturbations of integrable systems, e.g.
if one takes into account the influence of the Moon or Jupiter on the orbital
motion of the Earth. The suitable mathematical enviroment to model the systems
in question is provided by geometrical mechanics. The technological motivation
for this research comes from molecular chemistry and biology where billions of
years it would take the instability to develop itself on a cosmic scale,
translate into fractions of a second.
