
* 0072580
* Geometry Festival
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2000,06/24/2002
* Herman Gluck,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2004
* USD 36,000.00

THE GEOMETRY FESTIVAL DMS-0072580

The annual Geometry Festival has been held since 1985 at the University of
Pennsylvania, the University of Maryland, the University of North Carolina, the
State University of New York at Stony Brook, Duke University and New York
University's Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences. This three day
conference focuses on the major recent results in geometry and related fields.
There are typically seven invited one-hour talks, no parallel sessions, and
ample opportunity and space for groups to get together for discussion. The award
provides partial support for graduate students, post-doctoral researchers,
invited speakers and persons from under-represented groups to attend the
conference. Facilities at the Geometry Festival are handicapped-accessible. In
several recent Geometry Festivals, there have been special activities for women
mathematicians.

The Geometry Festival was held April 2-5, 1998 at the State University of New
York at Stony Brook, April 16-18, 1999 at the University of Pennsylvania, and
will be held April 14-16, 2000 at the University of Maryland. Future sites are
decided approximately one year in advance. Further information is available at
the Geometry Festival websites for last year's conference,
<http://www.math.upenn.edu/geometryfestival.html>, and at the site for the
upcoming conference, <http://www.math.umd.edu/research/geomfest> . Each Geometry
Festival website contains a link to the website for the next Festival, as soon
as this is known.
