
* 0072551
* Determinants, analytic torsion, and functional analytic models for Dirac operators
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2000,05/18/2001
* Matthias Lesch,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2003
* USD 75,657.00

DMS-0072551 Matthias Lesch

Dirac type operators are symmetric first order elliptic differential operators
arising naturally in Riemannian geometry. They are of considerable interest in
theoretical physics. Given such an operator on a compact manifold with boundary
it is possible to characterize those boundary conditions which lead to a self--
adjoint elliptic problem. These so--called well--posed boundary value problems
were introduced by R. T. Seeley. A recent account from a functional analytic
perspective was given by the researcher in collaboration with J. Br\"uning. This
is the starting point of the current project in which the researcher wants to
investigate spectral invariants associated to Dirac operators on manifolds with
boundary. More specifically, we want to present an analytic proof of the gluing
formula for the analytic torsion in the presence of an arbitrary flat bundle. As
a consequence one obtains an alternative approach to Cheeger--Muller type
theorems on the relation between analytical and topological torsion in the most
general setting, including manifolds with boundary. An invariant related to the
analytic torsion is the zeta-regularized determinant. We want to study this
determinant as a function of the boundary condition, generalizing earlier work
of Burghelea-Friedlander--Kappeler and Scott-Wojciechowski. The third
subproject, jointly with J. Bruening, deals with a functional analytic approach
to boundary value problems for Dirac type operators. The ultimate goal is to
find a simple functional analytic model for a Dirac type operator on a manifold
with boundary which allows to derive basic results like heat trace expansions,
index theorems and the spectral flow theorem. Such a model would hopefully lead
to such theorems for manifolds with corners.

Dirac type operators are symmetric first order elliptic differential operators
arising naturally in Riemannian geometry. They are of considerable interest in
theoretical physics. There are interesting relations between the spectrum of the
operator (the 'measurable' quantities of the physical system) and the underlying
geometry. In general the spectrum of the operator is hard to compute. However,
it is possible to extract certain spectral invariants which are intimately
related to the geometry. If the underlying geometry is a manifold with boundary
then, at first, one has to impose boundary conditions in order to get a self--
adjoint problem and hence a well--defined spectrum. In the current project the
author wants to investigate certain spectral invariants (analytic torsion,
determinant) for such boundary value problems. A special issue is the dependence
of the invariants on the choice of the boundary condition.
