
* 0088950
* Topological and analytical invariants of singularities
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/2000,06/23/2000
* Andras Nemethi,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2003
* USD 60,000.00

Proposal: DMS-0088950

PI: Andas N\methi

Abstract: An invariant of a normal surface singularity is topological if it is
a 3-manifold invariant of its link, or equivalently, if it can be determined
from the combinatorics of its minimal resolution graph. The driving question of
the proposal is: when are the geometric genus and the Hilbert-Samuel function
topological? The proposal has three parts. The main message of the first part is
that for those Gorenstein singularities whose link is a rational homology
sphere, the work of Artin and Laufer on rational, respectively on minimally
elliptic singularities can be continued. The optimism is partly based on the
author's recent work on Gorenstein elliptic singularities with rational homology
sphere links. For these singularities the author proved among other facts that
their geometric genus is topological: it is exactly the length of the elliptic
sequence (in the sense of S. S.-T. Yau). The first step in any general
investigation is the testing of the conjectures in some non-trivial particular
cases. In the second part of the proposal the case of suspension singularities
is discussed in more details. The third part of the proposal deals with higher
dimensional generalizations of the Artin-Laufer program.

Local analytic spaces are defined by locally defined analytic functions, in
particular they carry a lot of analytic invariants. A very important question in
their classification is the following: can these analytic invariants be
determined from the topological description of these spaces? In the case of
complex surface singularities, the topological structure is determined from the
link of the singularity which is an oriented 3-manifold. The goal of the project
is to describe some of the analytic information of the singular space in terms
of this 3-manifold (in those cases when it is possible).


