
* 0101539
* 2001 Ahlfors-Bers Colloquium
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2001,08/28/2001
* William Abikoff,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2002
* USD 30,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0101539 Principal Investigator: William Abikoff

The Ahlfors-Bers Colloquium is to be held in October 2001 at the University of
Connecticut campus at Storrs. This award primarily supports the participation of
graduate students, junior researchers, and speakers. Plenary lectures are
planned to cover a wide-ranging agenda in geometric function theory, hyperbolic
geometry, dynamics, and other topics and workshop days early in the meeting are
planned to showcase junior researchers.

The Ahlfors-Bers Colloquium is one of a series of conferences on geometric
function theory, Riemann surfaces and related topics that have been held every
three or four years since 1965. The meetings' name honors Lars Ahlfors and
Lipman Bers, two giants in complex analysis who shaped the meeting's subjects
over the twentieth century. The current core of geometric function theory
consists mainly of Riemann surfaces (two-dimensional spaces defined over the
complex numbers, such as the collection of all complex solutions to a typical
single polynomial equation in two variables), Teichmueller theory (an approach
to studying the variations of structure possible for a particular Riemann
surface), Kleinian groups (the most important discrete groups of isometries of
hyperbolic three-space), iteration of rational functions (which combines
dynamical systems ideas with function theory), and hyperbolic manifolds. This
core reaches back 150 years and meets or includes some of the most active
specialties in current mathematical research. Abstract

Award: DMS-0101539 Principal Investigator: William Abikoff

The Ahlfors-Bers Colloquium is to be held in October 2001 at the University of
Connecticut campus at Storrs. This award primarily supports the participation of
graduate students, junior researchers, and speakers. Plenary lectures are
planned to cover a wide-ranging agenda in geometric function theory, hyperbolic
geometry, dynamics, and other topics and workshop days early in the meeting are
planned to showcase junior researchers.

The Ahlfors-Bers Colloquium is one of a series of conferences on geometric
function theory, Riemann surfaces and related topics that have been held every
three or four years since 1965. The meetings' name honors Lars Ahlfors and
Lipman Bers, two giants in complex analysis who shaped the meeting's subjects
over the twentieth century. The current core of geometric function theory
consists mainly of Riemann surfaces (two-dimensional spaces defined over the
complex numbers, such as the collection of all complex solutions to a typical
single polynomial equation in two variables), Teichmueller theory (an approach
to studying the variations of structure possible for a particular Riemann
surface), Kleinian groups (the most important discrete groups of isometries of
hyperbolic three-space), iteration of rational functions (which combines
dynamical systems ideas with function theory), and hyperbolic manifolds. This
core reaches back 150 years and meets or includes some of the most active
specialties in current mathematical research.
