
* 0102525
* Cycles, Differential Characters and Global Problems in Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/2001,03/13/2003
* H. Blaine Lawson,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 05/31/2004
* USD 329,748.00

Abstract for DMS - 0102525 (Blaine Lawson)

This project is concerned with global problems in geometry and in particular
with the study of cycles residues and differential characters. It focuses on the
relationship between certain important families of cycles in a space and the
geometry of the space itself. Of particular interest are algebraic cycles and
the cycles associated to singularities of mappings or the higher order contact
of geometric structures. These objects -- of importance in themselves -- have
been shown to have ties to other areas of mathematics. A major aim here is the
discovery and development of such ties. The proposal has several interrelated
parts. The first concerns groups of algebraic cycles and cocycles on a
projective variety. A theory of homology-type based on cycles has been developed
by the proposer and others. It will be used to study concrete questions about
algebraic spaces. In a variant of the theory involving real algebraic cycles,
surprizing connections to equivariant homotopy theory have been found. The
implications for real algebraic geometry will be explored, and the quaternionic
analogues will be studied. A second part of the proposal concerns differential
characters, objects which mediate between cycles and smooth data, and lead to
important geometric invariants. Recent discoveries have been made concerning
them -- for example, the existence of a fundamental duality theorem. Further
development of the theory is proposed. Geometric results will be sought by
bringing the calculus of variations to bear in this domain. A third area of the
proposal concerns the study of singularities and characteristic forms. The
subject includes a generalization of Chern-Weil theory which gives canonical
homologies between singularities of bundle maps and characteristic forms. Many
applications concerning the global geometry of singularities, and its relation
to characteristic classes and differential characters, will be investigated. A
forth area is concerned with special cycles in geometry: Special Lagrangian
cycles in Calabi-Yau manifolds, and associative and Cayley cycles in G(2) and
Spin(7) spaces. These latter subjects relate to gauge field theory and gravity
in Physics as well as many areas of geometry and algebra.

A concept of central importance in geometry is that of a ``cycle''. In
algebraic geometry a cycle corresponds to the simultaneous solution of a system
of polynomial equations. In differential geometry cycles arise in many ways: as
the large scale solutions of certain differential equations, and as the level
sets and singularity sets of differentiable mappings. Curves and surfaces in
space are simple examples. This proposal is concerned with the study of certain
important classes of cycles which arise in geometry. Part of the study aims at
relating them to fundamental large-scale geometry of the surrounding space. In
the algebraic case this has led to the establishment of surprizing and important
relationships between spaces of algebraic cycles and fundamental constructions
in algebraic topology that have led to new insights in both fields. This work
will be continued with the intent of obtaining further concrete applications. A
second part of the proposal concerns differential characters, objects which
mediate between cycles and smooth data. They lead to important geometric
invariants and have appeared in discussions of the ``Mirror Symmetry
Conjecture'' from modern physics. The proposer has made some recent discoveries
about characters, including a basic Duality Theorem. Further development of the
theory and its applications is proposed. Another area of investigation is
concerned with relations between cycles and geometry which arise from
connections. Connections are fundamental in mathematics, where they constitute
differentiation laws, and in physics, where they represent the fundamental
forces of nature at the classical level. The investigator has developed a theory
of singular connections which encompasses much previously unrelated phenomena
and has applications to many areas of geometry. The proposal will continue this
work with emphasis on applications. Yet another area of the proposal is
concerned with very special cycles in geometry which relate to gauge field
theory and gravity in Physics as well as many areas of geometry and algebra.
This project will also be concerned with graduate student development. Students
will be part of the research team. There will also be an undergraduate
educational effort aimed at fostering mathematical independence and developing
interactive environments.
