
* 0103838
* Smooth Only Torsion-free G_3 Holonomy, Normal Holonomy and Isoparametric Hypersurfaces in Spheres
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2001,06/04/2001
* Quo-Shin Chi,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 06/30/2004
* USD 97,500.00

Abstract of NSF Proposal #0103838 Dr. Chi proposes to find smooth torsion-free
G_3 connections that are not analytic by exploring a certain system of partial
differential equations induced from such connections. The affirmative solution
to this work will open a new avenue of research about these connections, for
which all the known examples by far have been analytic. He also proposes to
investigate the classification problem of isoparametric hypersurfaces with four
principal curvatures in spheres by investigating the normal holonomy Lie algebra
of a focal submanifold of the hypersurface, which contains the information about
the 2nd fundamental form of the focal submanifold, which is, by his study,
crucial for the classification.

If one sets off from the North Pole and travels with a compass along a loop, one
will discover that at the end of the trip back at the North Pole the compass
needle has turned a degree. This says mathematically that parallel translation
(induced by a linear connection) of vectors along loops can detect whether the
space is flat, which is fundamental to Einstein's Theory of Relativity. In
Hermann Weyl's terms, the existence of inertia systems in the universe warrants
that its linear connection is torsion-free. The project on torsion-free G_3
connections is a study of the rather anomalous nature of these connections among
all exotic holonomies whose development has been participated by the PI. The
notion of isoparametric hypersurfaces was first proposed in connection with wave
fronts in Euclidean space and recently the more general Dupin hypersurfaces were
tied with integrable hamiltonian systems of hydrodynamic type. Shortly after
their introduction the isoparametric hypersurfaces were all classified in
Euclidean and hyperbolic spaces of all dimensions. The complete classification
of such hypersurfaces in spheres of arbitrary dimensions has defied people's
efforts for nearly six decades, despite many outstanding results achieved in the
past three decades. The PI's second project is to utilize the normal holonomy
and the new approach of him, T. Cecil and G. Jensen toward the classification in
the case of four principal curvatures.
