
* 0103282
* "Complex Manifolds with special Structures"
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2001,04/26/2002
* Zhuang-dan Guan,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 55,000.00

Complex Manifolds with special Structures, Abstract

author: Zhuang-dan Guan



My research has been largely in the area of complex manifolds and have a number
of problems to work on. Recently, I am working on three major directions: (1)
Classification of compact hyperkahler manifolds, (2) Stability and extremal
metrics, (3) Classification of Complex homogeneous spaces. Our research was
highly concentrated on these directions for the last 4 to 5 years. We expect to
work on extremal metrics and hyperkahler manifolds for some other years since
many breakthroughs are happenning in these directions. The picture for extremal
metrics is becoming clear after many years of research. It can be described by
the geodesic stability principles. The uniqueness comes from the convex property
of the modified Mabuchi functional on Mabuchi moduli space of Kahler metrics and
the existence of geodesics between Kahler metrics [GM4]. The existence should be
the same as the geodesic stability [GM7]. I already test these principles by
both the examples in my dissertation and those in [GM7]. For the toric
manifolds, we already proved the uniqueness and that existence implies the
geodesic stability. We are trying to solve the final part of the geodesic
stability principles that geodesic stable implies existence for toric manifolds.
We also test the geodesic stability for many toric manifolds, e. g., the
manifold obtained by blowing up two points in a 2 dimensional complex projective
space. This will eventually solve the historical problem of existing Kahler-
Einstein metrics and extremal metrics. The best condidates of Hodge diamonds for
the complex 4 dimensional compact hyperkahler manifolds are described by the
possible pairs of the second and third Betti numbers (5,36),(7,8),(8,0),(23,0)
([GHS4]). Now it is the time to work on classification with many tools as
Lagrangian fibration, Rozansky-Witten invariants, geometric elliptic genera. A
sandwich inequality of Rozansky-Witten invariants suggests further results for
higher dimensional case. The classification of compact complex homogeneous
spaces is reduced to the better understood manifolds as parallelizable
manifolds, reductive spaces and primary spaces in [GH7]. We will try to
understand more about the higher step primary spaces in the future.

The research of Kahler-Einstein metric has been pioneered by many well-known
mathematicians including several Fields Medal receivers. It turns out that there
are many similarity between this field and the Hitchin-Kobayashi correspondence
in the holomorphic vector bundles on compact Kahler manifolds. Both fields are
closed related to Physics Science, e.g., Einstein equation, general relativity,
Yang-Mills, Mirror Symmetry, Calabi-Yau, etc. We will write up a textbook in
Kahler geometry describe a clear picture on both of these fields. Hyperkahler
manifolds and homogeneous manifolds are some important manifolds which have some
physics origin as that of Calabi-Yau manifolds and are unsolved classical topics
in complex geometry. The pictures for these fields become clearer recently.
