
* 0103993
* Group Actions on Manifolds with Positive Sectional Curvature
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2001,05/30/2001
* Krishnan Shankar,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 08/31/2003
* USD 78,039.00

Abstract for DMS - 0103993

A general problem in Riemannian geometry is to find and describe manifolds that
admit a complete Riemannian metric of positive sectional curvature. If there is
no positive lower bound on the curvature, then the manifold is known to be
diffeomorphic to Euclidean space, by the Cheeger-Gromoll-Meyer Soul theorem. In
the class of closed, positively curved manifolds, there are few restrictions,
most of which are classical, such as the Bonnet-Myers and Synge theorems. For
closed, simply connected manifolds, there is essentially just Gromov's theorem
bounding the total Betti number in a given dimension. Given that there are few
known obstructions, it is frustrating that the set of known examples, although
infinite, is relatively small. My research is concerned with understanding the
geometry and topology of the known examples. More specifically, the goals are:
1) to attempt to find new examples of positively curved manifolds by studying
more general metrics on biquotients (in collaboration with J.-H. Eschenburg), 2)
to compute the isometry groups for the known cohomogeneity one manifolds of
positive curvature and 3) to see whether the 7-dimensional Berger space is
diffeomorphic to a 3-sphere bundle over the 4-sphere (in collaboration with N.
Kitchloo).

Riemannian geometry arose from trying to understand curvature. Intuitively, we
know that tabletops are flat while basketballs and saddles are curved. Geometers
are able to quantify curvature precisely and it provides a numerical invariant
that helps distinguish objects. For instance, the surface of a doughnut and the
surface of a coffee cup have the same nature i.e., they are both surfaces with
one hole, but they are shaped differently. On the other hand, the surface of a
ball (usually called a sphere) is different in shape and nature from the surface
of a doughnut (usually called a torus). How can we be sure that this is always
the case? One may wonder if it is possible to deform the sphere suitably so that
we might end up with the torus. A sphere has positive curvature everywhere while
it can be shown that no matter what shape a torus takes, it will always have
zero curvature somewhere. This tells us that the two objects are somehow
fundamentally different from each other. Differential geometry is also the
language used to express the general theory of relativity, our best theoretical
description of gravity and its effects on the universe. In general relativity, a
vacuous space-time universe would be inherently flat. This idealized state is
warped by the presence of masses or energy, Thus, gravity is the curvature in
space-time, and by understanding the geometry of Lorentzian space-time, one may
some day understand the shape of the universe. My work involves the study of
positively curved objects in higher dimensions. This is part of trying to
understand how the structure imposed by curvature (geometry) is essential to
understanding the nature (topology) of an object and vice versa.
