
* 0104047
* Complex Analysis and Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2001,07/19/2001
* Daniel Burns,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 07/31/2004
* USD 78,600.00

Abstract NSF Proposal DMS-0104047

Speaking more technically, the proposal aims to treat four research lines in
complex geometry and analysis. We are studying the Grauert tube construction for
its rigidity and uniquesness properties for large (maximal) radius or domain,
and examining whether this point of view adds to old questions in representation
theory and automorphic forms. Second, we will study a Kaehler-Einstein version
of Min-Oo's rigidity theorem which we conjecture to hold. We will continue work
with X. Gong on Levi flat hypersurfaces with singularities, especially algebraic
ones with isolated singularities. Their importance is suggested by recent work
of Siu and others proving the conjecture of Camacho on the non-existence of
smooth, Levi-flat hypersurfaces in the complex projective plane. Finally we
propose to study the rigidity of special classes of Schubert cycles on flag
manifolds, following upon the work of the PI's former student M. Walters and,
independently, R. Bryant.

The proposal addresses several questions in complex analysis and geometry. Most
people are familiar with Descartes' analytic geometry from high school: in most
respects, this line of investigation is the modern descendent of those early
ideas. We will study the relationship between a geometric locus, sometimes
defined by equations as in Descartes' original case, and its analytic
properties, those properties influenced by the calculus of Newton and Leibniz.
In particular we study a complexification of geometric locus, that is, we add
"imaginary points" to the geometry, related to the imaginary unit "i", and study
the influence of the imaginary points on the real points and their geometry.
Another portion of the project seeks to understand the asymptotic, or long range
properties of special metric geometries related to the Einstein equations. It is
well known that both of these properties can be influential in physical
applications, and there is recent work to lead one to hope that both this
complexification construction and the asymptotics of Einstein metrics can be
used to understand parts of the so-called Maldacena correspondence in
theoretical physics.
