
* 0125170
* Gauge theory and low-dimensional topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2001,07/17/2001
* Paul Feehan,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2005
* USD 95,550.00

DMS-0125170 Paul M. N. Feehan

The principal goal of our research is to prove the celebrated formula of Edward
Witten (1994), relating the Donaldson and Seiberg-Witten series of smooth four-
manifolds. Witten used quantum field theory methods to derive his celebrated
formula, based on the concept of `duality', whereas the approach we have been
pursuing jointly with Thomas Leness is a mathematical one, employing a moduli
space of non-abelian monopoles as a cobordism between links of Donaldson and
Seiberg-Witten moduli spaces. We have already partially verified Witten's
formula using this approach, showing that in many cases the series agree up
through terms of order depending only on the topology of the four-manifold. We
aim to build on those results, by showing next that a relation between the two
series of the overall expected shape exists and then applying auxiliary
techniques to prove that his formula is the only one possible. A second goal of
our research is to develop a proof of Witten's formula, in the special case of
symplectic four-manifolds equipped with Lefschetz fibrations, and shed light on
the relationship between Seiberg-Witten invariants, Donaldson invariants, and
the structure of Lefschetz fibrations. Ultimately, we also hope to explain the
relationship between the mathematical and quantum field theory methods of
deriving Witten's formula.

Witten's formula, as understood by mathematicians, is part of a physical theory
developed by Witten and Nathan Seiberg relating non-abelian Yang-Mills theory (a
generalization of Maxwell's theory of electromagnetics) and the simpler abelian
Seiberg-Witten gauge field theories. In the physical world, quantum Yang-Mills
theories provide a theoretical basis for describing elementary particle
interactions. In the mathematical world, beginning with the work of Simon
Donaldson in 1983, classical Yang-Mills and Seiberg-Witten gauge theories have
played a fundamental role in probing the geometry of four-dimensional spaces.
String theory is often cited by physicists as the most promising candidate for a
unification of quantum field theory (itself is a unification of the
electromagnetic, weak, and strong forces) and Einstein's theory of gravity. Such
a `grand unified theory' would give a single theoretical framework for
explaining both short-range, high-energy elementary particle interactions and
the long-range gravitational force. However, discovery of such a unified
framework has eluded physicists for nearly three-quarters of a century.
Furthermore, while Einstein's theory of gravity is founded on rigorous
mathematics, the goal of providing a mathematical foundation for quantum field
theory has not yet been realized. Most physicists agree that particle
accelerators of impossibly large size would be needed to experimentally verify
that string theory is the `right' theory of nature. However, while independent,
mathematical verifications of quantum field theory predictions can never replace
experimental tests, they may increase our confidence that quantum field theory
predictions are correct when experimental checks are impossible with current
technology. We hope that our project may serve as a small step in such
directions.


