
* 0203219
* Contact Geometry, Fano Orbifolds, and Einstein Metrics
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 05/15/2002,08/26/2003
* Charles Boyer,NM,University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2006
* USD 315,000.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0203219.

Professors Boyer and Galicki propose to investigate several projects in geometry
and topology. The objective of all the projects is to study fundamental
questions in Riemannian Geometry with two main focal points: Contact Geometry of
orbifold bundles over Fano varieties and the existence of some special (i.e.,
Einstein, positive Ricci curvature) metrics on such spaces. The questions and
problems proposed here are deeply rooted in the principal investigators' earlier
work which exploited a fundamental relationship between contact geometry of
Sasakian-Einstein spaces and two kinds of Kaehler geometry, namely Q-factorial
Fano varieties with Kaehler-Einstein orbifold metrics with positive scalar
curvature, and Calabi-Yau manifolds with their Kaehler Ricci-flat metrics. The
most recent work of the principal investigators has led to an important
breakthrough in the study of such structures when, using recent results of
Demailly and Kollar, the principal investigators were able to construct new
examples of compact Einstein manifolds in dimension 5 as well as many positive
Einstein metrics on families of rational homology 7-spheres. The techniques used
by the principal investigators borrow from several different fields; the
algebraic geometry of Mori theory and intersection theory, the analysis of the
Calabi Conjecture, and finally the classical differential topology of links of
isolated hypersurface singularities. These methods can be extended much further
and in various directions. An example that stands out in this respect is the
question of the existence of Einstein metrics on exotic spheres, which is one of
the main objectives of this proposal. More generally the principal investigators
want to address several classification problems concerning compact Sasakian-
Einstein manifolds in dimensions 5 and 7. These two dimensions are important for
two separate reasons. In view of earlier work higher dimensional examples can be
constructed using the join construction. At the same time these two odd
dimensions appear to play special role in Superstring Theory. In the context of
recent developements in String and M-Theory the principal investigators also
propose to investigate some related problems concerning self-dual Einstein
metrics in dimension 4 and exceptional holonomy metrics in dimension 7 and 8.

This project is intended to further the understanding of the mathematics of
certain important types of geometry. While this endeavor is not directly
motivated by advances in technology, the history of mathematics adequately
demonstrates that today's pure mathematics often becomes tomorrow's applied
mathematics. Indeed the mathematics being considered in this project is
currently being used in the field of Elementary Particle Physics, more
specifically, in the attempts at understanding a unified description of the
fundamental forces of the universe.

-
