
* 0204002
* Topics in Differential Geometry and Mathematical Physics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2002,07/15/2005
* Yat Sun Poon,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 150,000.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0204002.

The PI's first program in this proposal is concerned with the geometry of
Hermitian or hyper-Hermitian connections with totally skew torsions. The results
will be applicable to an investigation in quantum mechanical black holes. The
PI's second program is to study the complex deformation theory and Hermitian
geometry of nilmanifolds. Parallel to the algebraic analysis on the classical
and extended moduli, he and his collaborators investigatge the geometry on these
spaces from the viewpoint of special holonomy and symplectic structures. A
senior participant proposes to analyse the structures of compact quaternionic
Kaehler manifolds and the A-hat genus of non-spin manifolds with finite second
homotopy. Both issues are tackled through an analysis of the rigidity of
elliptic genus. Through the theory of elliptic genus, the two proposers will
jointly calculate a Hilbert polynomial relevant to holomorphic contact
structures or rational curves invariant with respect to a holomorphic
automorphisms.

The proposed projects here are enabled by theoretical physicists' and
mathematicians' knowledge on field theory, complex deformation theory and
differential topology of fixed point sets. All proposed projects are intended to
address issues relevant to current physcial or mathematical issues. The PI's
projects will address a type of geometry less known to mathematicians than to
physicists. The results will increase mathematicians' knowledge on Hermitian
geometry and directly addresses issues to theoretical physcists' concerns. The
senior participant's project addresses a long- standing conjecture in the field
of holonomy. The central tool in this project is a novel differntial topological
mechinary for studying fixed point sets with respect to group actions. The
investigators joint project will combine their expertise to extract topological
information on a class ofspace central in algebraic geometry.
