
* 0204589
* Conference on Minimal Varieties in Geometry and Physics, June 1-7, 2002, Stony Brook, New York
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 04/01/2002,03/19/2002
* Michael Anderson,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 03/31/2003
* USD 33,000.00

ABSTRACT

Proposal #: DMS-0204589 Conference on Minimal Varieties in Geometry and Physics
PI's: M. Anderson, D. Gromoll, C. LeBrun, M. Rocek (Stony Brook)

The Dept. of Mathematics at SUNY Stony Brook will host a conference on MINIMAL
VARIETIES IN GEOMETRY AND PHYSICS June 1 - June 7, 2002 on the occasion of
Blaine Lawson's 60th birthday. The progress in the study of minimal varieties in
a broad sense has had a profound impact on numerous areas in geometry and
physics. This conference will bring together mathematicians and physicists
working on minimal varieties and their recent applications.

The award provides partial support for active researchers in this area, who
otherwise have limited means of funding, to participate in the conference. Most
of the funds will support younger mathematicians and mathematicians from
underrepresented groups.

Confirmed Speakers: S. Bloch, J.P. Bourguignon, R. Bryant, J. Cheeger, T.
Colding, J. Figueroa-O'Farrill, E. Friedlander, H. Gillet, H. Gluck, P.
Griffiths, M. Gromov, R. Harvey, D. Hoffman, P. Lima-Filho, R. MacPherson, W.
Meeks, W. Minicozzi, R. Osserman, M. Rocek, J. Rosenberg, R. Schoen, I. Singer,
G. Tian.

Organizing Committee: M. Anderson, D. Gromoll, C. LeBrun, M. Rocek, A. Phillips,
S. Simanca.

The conference has 4 main themes: minimal submanifolds of Riemannian manifolds,
calibrated geometries, complex subvarieties and algebraic cycles, and the Dirac
operator.

There will be 3 mini-courses: I. Minimal surfaces in 3-manifolds (Colding and
Minicozzi) II. M-theory and calibrations (Figueroa-O'Farrill) III.Algebraic
Cycles (TBA)

Detailed information on the conference is available at
http://www.math.sunysb.edu/varieties
------------------------------------------------------------
