
* 0204687
* Geometry and Analysis on Groups
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2002,03/28/2002
* Andrzej Zuk,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2005
* USD 97,543.00

DMS-0204687 Andrzej Zuk

In this research project the PI proposes to study different problems related to
geometry, analysis and probability on discrete groups. The groups the PI is
interested in are lattices in Lie groups, groups generated by finite automata,
random and hyperbolic groups in the sense of Gromov, groups acting on buildings.
The PI found recently new examples of groups with property (T) and the PI
intends to continue the study of groups with this property. In particular, the
PI would like to find other groups with property (T) and continue the study of
automata groups. During this study the PI plans to investigate properties of
these groups related to amenability, torsion, growth and the following famous
conjectures: the Atiyah conjecture about L2 Betti numbers, the Baum-Connes
conjecture, and the Kaplansky-Kadison conjecture about the idempotents. The PI
proposes also to continue the study of spectral properties of random walks
operators and more generally the Hecke operators for groups generated by finite
automata and buildings.

Property (T) is a quite abstract property of some groups, but which found
applications in constructions of computer and communication networks. The PI
proposes to find new groups with this property which would have applications to
several problems related to efficiency of certain algorithms. The other project
concerning automata groups combines the problems from the abstract group theory
and applications in computer science. The PI plans to give several mini-courses
for graduate students based on this research.
