
* 0205825
* RUI: Surfaces and their horizons, geometric structures, and pseudogroups
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 10/01/2002,09/17/2002
* Alberto Candel,CA,The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2006
* USD 99,027.00

The proposed research is in the area of geometry and dynamics. The objective is
to understand the asymptotic behavior of orbits of dynamical systems. One
specific problem deals with surface laminations in hyperbolic three-manifolds.
Rather than studying recurrence phenomena taking place in a compact space a
global approach is taken. The geometry of hyperbolic space has a well defined
visual boundary representing the many possible ways of diverging to infinity.
Moreover, the ambient hyperbolic geometry affects the geometry of the leaves of
the lamination under consideration. The basic problem is then to study how these
geometries relate with respect to their approach to the visual boundaries, and
to examine the influence that the ambient hyperbolic geometry exerts on the
leaves. Within this program it is also natural to consider laminations whose
leaves have stronger geometric or analytic properties, or both, as for example
when they satisfy the minimal surface differential equation. Such hypothesis
allows for the use of analytical and probabilistic tools, and more precise
information can be obtained. Laminations whose leaves are minimal surfaces are
also relevant to understand the geometry of other three-manifolds as well. They
appear to play an important role in the topological hyperbolization conjecture
for three-manifolds, as is known that non-hyperbolic three manifolds have a
lamination by minimal surfaces. This proposal also includes problems in the area
of rigidity of actions of semisimple groups. The main focus is in the so-called
Gromov's centralizer theorem, a major tool in understanding the symmetries of
geometric structures on manifolds. Other questions relating to the structure of
pseudogroups of transformations are also proposed.

Dynamical systems are used to model processes in many areas, for example the
weather, physical or chemical processes, and the evolution of living organisms
and their morphology. They are also used for modeling processes which evolve
from a finite amount of data according to some set of rules, either specified
before hand or of a random nature, as neural networks in the brain or systems of
digital processors in a computer. The objective of the proposed research is to
understand the qualitative structure and asymptotic behavior of certain
dynamical systems. One of the topics in this proposal is to study the behavior
of two-dimensional systems evolving in a three-dimensional space, and
specifically the interaction of the features of the surrounding space and the
geometry and asymptotic behavior of their trajectories. This can be approached
in a variety of ways: by purely geometric means, by studying certain
differential equations that define their orbits, or via a probabilistic
approach. Understanding basic features of these dynamical systems and these
spaces, while having intrinsic geometric interest and beauty, could be relevant,
for example, in areas like partial differential equations, solid state physics,
structure of crystals and quasi-crystals and their defects, statistical
mechanics, computation and algorithms.
