
* 0226121
* Superrigidity, Actions on Manifolds and CAT(0) Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/2002,06/13/2002
* David Fisher,NY,Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2006
* USD 106,494.00

The proposed research studies the interaction between dynamical systems and
geometry. Work of Furstenberg, Mostow and Margulis shows that understanding
certain dynamical systems is an important tool in the study geometric properties
of symmetric and locally symmetric spaces. . One important property of symmetric
spaces is that they have non-positive curvature. The investigator plans to
extend this work in several inter-related directions. The study of symmetric
spaces will be generalized to include more general spaces of non-positive
curvature as well as more general maps between symmetric spaces. This raises the
possibility of purely dynamical applications. The group of diffeomorphisms of a
compact manifold acts on the space of square-integrable Riemannian metrics,
which is naturally an infinite-dimensional space of non-positive curvature. The
investigator will attempt to exploit these relationships to prove long-standing
conjectures of Zimmer.

Dynamical systems is an important and relatively young field of mathematics that
investigates the evolution of physical or mathematical systems over time (e.g.
fluid flow). New ideas from dynamical systems theory such as chaos and fractals
have had a profound impact on our perception of the world. One of the deepest
and most influential mathematical applications of dynamical systems has been the
study of geometric properties of spaces with "many symmetries". The proposed
research will extend our understanding of this deep connection between geometry
and dynamics.
