
* 0302518
* Asymptotic Geometry of Eigenfunctions and Polynomials
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,05/08/2003
* Steve Zelditch,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 183,000.00

ASYMPTOTIC GEOMETRY OF EIGENFUNCTIONS AND POLYNOMIALS

Abstract:

This proposal is concerned with the asymptotics of eigenfunctions and
eigenvalues of the Laplacian on Riemannian manifold, and analogues for the
complex Laplacian on Kahler manifolds. Using methods of semi-classical analysis
(the mathematics of the classical limit of quantum mechanics), the high
frequency limit of eigenfunctions is related to the dynamics of the geodesic
flow. The first application is to the well-known inverse spectral problem for
analytic plane domains. The new idea is to use an exact formula for the
Dirichlet resolvent and a Feynman diagram analysis of its trace. One obtains for
the first time explicit formulae for so-called wave trace invariants in terms of
the Taylor coefficients of the domain at endpoints of a bouncing ball orbit.
From these one seeks to recover the Taylor coefficients and hence an analytic
domain. So far the best result is that one can recover a mirror symmetric
analytic domain from its spectrum. The second application is to geometry of
eigenfunctions. Sogge and the proposer proved that the maximum possible growth
rate of sup-norms of eigenfunctions only occurs on boundarlyless Riemannian
manifolds which contain recurrent points, such that a positive measure of
geodesics leaving the point return in a fixed time. One project is to prove this
(if true) for bounded domains. A similar analysis is interesting for boundary
values of eigenfunctions, which are important in boundary control theory.
Hassell and the proposer have recently proved the ergodicity of boundary values
of eigenfunctions when the billiard flow of the domain is ergodic, and this gave
the first asymptotic estimates of even the L2 norms of the boundary values.
Methods developed in that paper should have further applications to the geometry
of eigenfunctions. The third project, joint with B. Shiffman is to apply
semiclassical methods to statistical algebraic geometry, i.e., to finding
statistical patterns in the zeros of polynomials. Among the patterns found so
far are that zeros of systems of polynomials tend to repel in dimension one, be
liike a neutral gas in dimension two and attract in higher dimensions. New
problems are to explore the dependence of the distribution of zeros on the
Newton polytope or on the number of monomials, as in Khovanski's fewnomial
theory.

Semiclassical analysis is the area of mathematics which explores the classical
limit of quantum mechancs, i.e.the limit where the fuzzy, jumpy small scale
behavior of atoms and molecules merges with the solid, mechanical world we
experience. Planck's constant h measures the length scale. Although it arose in
physics, the same limit, as h tends to zero, arises in many problems in
mathematics and science, often quite disconnected from the original physical
background. This proposal is concerned with several problems of this kind.
Several are traditional and well-known problems, for instance trying to
determine a domain from its frequencies of vibration. Using semiclassical
analysis of a kind more familiar to physicists than mathematicians (Balian-Bloch
methods, Feynman diagrams), the first project is to obtain the best results to
date on the problem, can one hear the shape of a drum. The results so far
indicate that this method is better than any prior method. Another project is to
view the degree of a polynomial as 1/h (inverse Planck constant) and to use
semiclassical methods to find new statistical patterns in zeros and critical
points of polynomials. One result is that the exponents which occur in the
polynomials have a big impact on the positions of the zeros, leading to a
tunnelling theory of zeros analogous to the tunnelling theory of electrons
through barriers.


