
* 0302452
* Great Lakes Geometry Conference
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 04/15/2003,03/21/2003
* Xiuxiong Chen,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2004
* USD 15,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0302452 Principal Investigator: Xiu Xiong Chen

The next Great Lakes Geometry Conference will be held May 1 - 4, 2003 at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison. This is an international conference held
annually in the Midwest region, rotating among different universities. The aim
of this conference will be to introduce the latest developments in the field of
geometric analysis and some closely related areas. A partial list of topics
which will be covered by this conference include: (Kaehler-) Einstein equation
and constant scalar curvature metric equation (Yamabe problem); (Hermitian-)
Yang-Mills equation; minimal surface equation; harmonic map problem and J-
holomorphic curves (Cauchy-Riemann equation); and the geodesic equation in the
infinite dimensional space of Kaehler metrics which is given by a homogenous
complex Monge-Ampere equation. These equations fit together with the
corresponding evolution equations: (Kaehler-) Ricci flow, Yang-Mills flow, the
mean curvature flow, and the harmonic map flow, etc. People would like to know
(local and global) existence, regularity and uniqueness of solutions to these
equations. Many deep works have arisen by studying different aspects of these
challenging problems.

Differential geometry is a fundamental and vital field of mathematics which has
many far reaching applications beyond the realm of pure mathematics. To name a
few: the study of Kaehler geometry, especially Calabi-Yau manifolds, has
important applications in theoretical physics; the study of (inverse) mean
curvature flow has important applications in image processing; and the study of
curves, surfaces and their higher-dimensional analogues have important
applications in computer graphics, engineering and optimization.




