
* 0305505
* Geometry and Physics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 08/15/2003,08/06/2003
* Daniel Freed,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2007
* USD 345,156.00

Proposal DMS-0305505

Title: "Geometry and Physics"

ABSTRACT

There are three individual researchers supported on this grant. Professor Freed
and various coauthors study first twisted K-theory and loop groups, secondly
differential K-theory and geometric invariants of Dirac operators, and finally
anomalies in M-theory and string theory. Professor Hausel researches new
mathematics in quaternionic geometry which corresponds to known mathematics in
complex geometry, such as the moduli space of Higgs bundles, square integrable
harmonic forms, integration on circle compact manifolds and face vectors of
hyperplane arrangements. Professor Uhlenbeck has two projects on hyperbolic
equations, one of finding fundamental solutions of covariant-derivative wave
operators and one studying wave map blow-up in two space dimensions. She also
studies Virasoro actions in TCFT.

The three supported researchers are part of a large geometry group whose
research projects span many topics in geometry which originate in high energy
theoretical physics or engineering physics. In mathematics proper the work of
the group is not limited to geometric analysis, but also involves algebraic
geometry, geometric topology, algebraic topology, representation theory,
harmonic analysis, and mathematical physics. Essential to the group research are
collaborations among mathematicians with diverse backgrounds in mathematics,
physics and biology.
