
* 0305704
* Collaborative Research: Analytic and Geometric Aspects of Convergence Groups
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,03/29/2005
* Petra Taylor,CT,Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 194,031.00

DMS-0305704 Petra Taylor and Ed Taylor

This collaborative proposal details a program that the researchers are pursuing
to extract geometric, analytic and dynamic information concerning discrete
groups of quasiconformal mappings acting on a compact metric space. The
researchers' program consists of three ``themes'': The first theme concerns
certain geometric properties of Kleinian groups that are induced from the
existence of the ergodic Liouville measure on the unit tangent bundle of a
geometrically finite hyperbolic manifold. A primary goal is to pair Liouville
theory with quasiconformal deformation theory to the extent that it is revealing
of the geometry of the deformation space of hyperbolic structures uniformizing a
compact co-infinite hyperbolizable three-manifold. The second theme details an
ongoing program to show that various analytical, dynamical and topological
properties of Kleinian groups (e.g. the exponent of convergence, Hausdorff
dimension, porosity, etc.) illuminate the action of the group when the group in
question is generalized to a discrete convergence group. In this setting the
researchers are primarily concerned with discrete quasiconformal groups. The
third theme centers around certain non-equivariant interactions between complex
analysis and hyperbolic geometry; it generalizes the first two themes. The
motivating question is: How does the asymptotic geometry of the convex hull
boundary of a Jordan curve reflect the conformal geometry of the curve? Under
various stronger assumptions the researchers are investigating aspects of this
question from both a geometric and analytic perspective.

The research described in this proposal resides at the intersection between
hyperbolic geometry and conformal analysis. These topics form a vast and
fundamental area of study in mathematics which dates back to the 18th century,
when it was developed by such mathematicians as Gauss, Lobachevsky, Klein, and
Poincare. Though this proposal does not directly address physics, we note that
both hyperbolic geometry and conformal analysis (especially in the guise of
Teichmuller theory) have found recent spectacular application in theoretical
physics and cosmology. The proposers are dedicated researchers and educators,
and Boston College and Wesleyan University both have strong dual identities as
teaching and research institutions. An innovative component of the proposal is
to use its multi disciplinary nature to introduce motivated undergraduates to
areas of mathematics that are currently not well represented (e.g. geometry and
analysis) in the undergraduate degree programs at the proposers' respective
institutions. The researchers propose to initiate and maintain a ``Joint Boston
College - Wesleyan University Working Groups for Undergraduates and Beginning
Graduate Students,'' in part to entice talented undergraduates into
consideration of a career in mathematical research.
