
* 0306628
* Texas Geometry and Topology Conference
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 04/15/2003,08/13/2004
* Jon Pitts,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2007
* USD 33,030.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0306628 Principal Investigator: Huai-Dong Cao and Jon T. Pitts

The Texas Geometry and Topology Conference has been held spring and fall since
its founding in 1989, a total of 28 times. The conference has become an
extremely successful semiannual event in the Southwest. The next series of
conferences will have six primary sponsoring universities: The University of
Texas at Austin, Texas A&M University, Rice University, the University of
Houston, Texas Tech University, and Texas Christian University. The conference
is designed to enhance both the educational and the research atmosphere of the
growing community of Texas geometers and topologists. The conference is
committed to bring researchers of national and international stature to Texas to
discuss their research and to interact with mathematicians from Texas and
surrounding states. Summaries of talks with notation of important results have
been reported annually for some time and will continue similarly in the future.

By design, the Texas Geometry and Topology Conference has two high-impact foci.
First, the conference makes it possible for the community of geometers and
topologists from Texas and surrounding states (a huge geographic region) to meet
and share mathematics on a regular basis, which both stimulates individual
research and generates productive cooperative efforts between schools. Second,
the conference is committed to the strengthening and enrichment of the
mathematics personnel base. In order that there be no barrier to participation,
the conference is widely advertised, participation is open, and there are no
registration fees. Graduate students, junior faculty, women, minorities, and
persons with disabilities are especially encouraged to participate and to apply
for support.
