
* 0306656
* Pacific Northwest Geometry Seminar
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,04/30/2003
* James Isenberg,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 38,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0306656 Principal Investigator: James A. Isenberg

It is proposed that the National Science Foundation provide funding for the
meetings of the Pacific Northwest Geometry Seminar (PNGS) to be held during the
three-year period from July 1, 2003 to June 30, 2006 at University of British
Columbia, Oregon State University, University of Oregon, University of Utah,
University of Washington, Portland State University, and Stanford University.
PNGS meetings generally feature 4 or 5 invited research talks by leading experts
in differential geometry and algebraic geometry. The meetings also include
discussion sessions in which the speakers and participants assess the state of
various areas in geometry, and highlight open problems in these areas.

There are a number of very active researchers in geometry scattered throughout
the various universities which are involved in the Pacific Northwest Geometry
Seminar. These periodic meetings bring these researchers together for
consultation, collaboration, and stimulation of new ideas. A number of research
programs have been initiated as a result of interactions at these meetings. The
PNGS is especially valuable for graduate students in geometry at the various
participating universities which have small geometry groups. The PNGS meetings
give these students an excellent opportunity to see the broader picture of
research in geometry.
