
* 0306665
* Geometric Structures in Poisson Geometry and Applications
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2003,03/24/2005
* Ping Xu,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2007
* USD 196,781.00

DMS-0306665 Ping Xu

This project involves the study of Poisson geometry, with the goals of
understanding various geometric structures in connection with Poisson manifolds,
and studying their applications in analysis, integrable systems, quantization
and other related areas in mathematical physics. One of the main tools is the
theory of Lie groupoids and Lie algebroids. In particular, the investigator will
apply his previously developed theory of Morita equivalence to investigate a
geometric model of unified momentum map theory. He will also study stacks and
gerbes from the viewpoint of differentiable geometry, and investigate their
relationship to Lie groupoids. He plans to continue his study of twisted Poisson
structures, and also the universal lifting conjecture. The latter implies many
non-trivial results in Poisson geometry including the Karasev-Weinstein
symplectic realization theorem and the integration theorem for Lie bialgebroids
of Mackenzie and the investigator. This project also involves the study of
deformation quantization. The investigator will continue to study quantization
of classical dynamical r-matrices using his previously developed deformation
quantization techniques. Also, he will study quantization of Dubrovin Poisson
structures.

Poisson geometry is largely motivated by physics, and is in fact a mathematical
tool used to give a theoretical framework encompassing large parts of classical
mechanics. Lie groupoids are useful tools in studying the symmetry of various
geometric problems in Poisson geometry. Quantization is developed in order to
gain a better understanding of the relationship between classical mechanics and
quantum mechanics. At present, there are various applications of Poisson
geometry including control theory, machining automation, and robotic
manipulation.
