
* 0306441
* Problems in Complex Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,06/27/2003
* Terrence Napier,PA,Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 91,244.00

A smooth real-valued function f on a complex manifold X is said to be strongly
q-convex if its Levi form L(f) has at most q-1 nonpositive eigenvalues at each
point. The manifold X is called strongly q-convex if X admits an exhaustion
function which is strongly q-convex on the complement of some compact subset K
(X is q-complete if one may take K to be empty). There are also well-known
notions of q-convexity for complex spaces. If g is a Hermitian metric on X, then
f is of class SP(g,q) if the trace of the restriction of L(f) to any complex
vector subspace of dimension q in the tangent space at any point in X is
positive. Such functions are strongly q-convex. The principal investigator and
Mohan Ramachandran have applied such functions to obtain results concerning the
Levi problem and the structure of complete Kaehler manifolds. They have also
developed and applied analogous classes on complex spaces. The principal
investigator plans to apply such functions to extend some results for Kaehler
manifolds to singular Kaehler spaces and to study q-convexity properties of
coverings; in particular, covering spaces of (quasi)projective varieties. Some
or all of the proposed work will probably involve collaboration with Michael
Fraboni, Cezar Joita, or Mohan Ramachandran.

Complex spaces (in particular, Stein spaces and projective varieties), are the
fundamental objects of study in several complex variables and algebraic
geometry. The notion of q-convexity is one of the many useful generalizations of
geometric convexity (for example, a region in the plane is geometrically convex
if any line segment connecting two points in the region lies entirely within the
region). The convexity properties of a complex space (for example, a covering
space of a projective variety) are intimately connected with the space's
holomorphic function theory and geometry. Holomorphic functions on complex
spaces (for example, on regions in the complex number plane) are the natural
analogues of differentiable functions on the real number line from differential
calculus. Thus the study of convexity properties is an essential element in the
study of complex spaces. Moreover, notions of convexity (like those of symmetry)
appear in almost every field of mathematics, science, and engineering. Hence the
study of convexity properties of complex spaces provides further evidence of the
importance of convexity.




