
* 0306752
* Problems in geometric analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,05/04/2005
* Carolyn Gordon,NH,Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 449,566.00

Proposal 0306752 PIs: Carolyn Gordon, Scott Pauls, David Webb

Title: PROBLEMS IN GEOMETRIC ANALYISIS

The focus of the project will be inverse spectral geometry and analysis of
Riemannian and sub-Riemannian geometries on nilmanifolds. Inverse spectral
geometry is the study of the extent to which the geometry of a Riemannian
manifold can be recovered from spectral data. Gordon and Webb will consider
constructions of compact Riemannian manifolds with the same Laplace eigenvalue
spectrum and compare their local and global geometry. They, along with their
collaborators, will also consider the spectrum of Schroedinger operators on line
bundles over tori and spectral data for orbifolds. For noncompact manifolds, the
relevant spectral data are the scattering resonances and scattering phase.
Gordon, Webb, and Pauls, along with Peter Perry, will investigate possible
constructions of Riemannian metrics with the same scattering data. They will
also consider isoscattering potentials for the Schroedinger operator and
isoscattering obstacles. In the area of sub-Riemannian geometry, Pauls will
continue working towards a better understanding of variational problems in
Carnot groups, focusing on the regularity of minimal surfaces, the calculations
of the best isoperimetric constant for the Heisenberg group, extensions of
previous work to more general Carnot groups and on problems related to the
spectral theory of the subLaplacian (joint with Doyle, Gordon and Webb). He will
also continue working with Mike Wolf (Rice University) on two fundamental
problems in the theory of harmonic maps.

The investigators will address inverse spectral problems, inverse scattering
problems, and sub-Riemannian geometry. Inverse spectral geometry is rooted in
spectroscopy, the problem of understanding the nature of a system from the
characteristic frequencies of light or sound emitted. The investigators will
consider various constructions of objects (Riemannian manifolds such as planar
domains, balls, or spheres) which have the same spectra and will compare their
geometry in order to identify specific geometric properties that are not
spectrally determined. In the quantum mechanical description of a particle in a
potential, one distinguishes between ordinary bound states and scattering states
whose wave functions are nonnormalizable and whose energies can assume a
continuum of possible values. Inverse scattering theory seeks to understand as
much as possible about the nature of a potential from the scattering behavior
exhibited by particles interacting with the potential. The investigators will
address this problem by constructing and studying potentials with the same
scattering resonances. The investigations in sub-Riemannian geometry are
motivated by a wealth of physical phenomena including problems in wheeled
robotic control, satellite navigation and stabilization and thermodynamics. At
this point in time, relatively little is known about the general theory guiding
these types of control phenomena. Because of this, the investigators will focus
on gaining a better understanding of the solutions to cost minimization problems
on basic model spaces. Specifically, the investigators are focused on
constructing area minimizing surfaces in these settings in order to expose some
of the fundamental geometric principles governing the solutions to these types
of problems.
