
* 0307484
* Periodic Orbits of Hamiltonian Systems, the Almost Existence Theorem, and Poisson Topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,05/15/2003
* Viktor Ginzburg,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 162,717.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0307484 Principal Investigator: Viktor Ginzburg

The present proposal focuses on two projects closely related to the principal
investigator's previous work funded by NSF grants. These projects are the
problem of existence of periodic orbits for Hamiltonian dynamical systems and
the study of topological properties of certain Poisson manifolds. The first
problem Viktor Ginzburg addresses in this proposal is the investigation of the
size of the set of regular energy values on which a Hamiltonian system does not
have periodic orbits. By the almost existence theorem, this set must be of zero
measure and from counterexamples to the Hamiltonian Seifert conjecture it is
known that this set may be non-empty. Thus the question is to bridge the gap
between these two results. Another series of problems discussed in the proposal
concerns the existence of periodic orbits for Hamiltonian systems of a special
nature, including those describing the motion of a charge in a (strong) magnetic
field or, more generally, the existence of periodic orbits near Morse-Bott non-
degenerate symplectic extrema. These problems are closely related to the
investigation of the (relative) Hofer-Zehnder capacity function and the Floer
homology of certain Hamiltonians. The objective of the proposed research in the
area of Poisson topology is to study connections between the geometry of Poisson
structures and topology of underlying manifolds.

Hamiltonian dynamical systems describe many classes of physical processes in
which dissipative forces can be neglected. For example, planetary motion in
celestial mechanics and some electro- or magneto-dynamical processes can be, and
usually are, treated as Hamiltonian dynamical systems. One of the classical
subjects in the theory of dynamical systems is the study of periodic orbits
(i.e. cyclic motions). Periodic motion is the simplest and most common type of
motion after equilibrium. It is believed that a vast majority of Hamiltonian
systems have periodic orbits and systems without such orbits have only been
recently discovered. Yet, in all but simplest problems, finding periodic orbits
requires the use of advanced and powerful mathematical methods. The
investigation of periodic orbits lies at the very core of the modern theory of
Hamiltonian dynamical systems. One of the main themes of the proposal is
determining how large the collection of periodic/aperiodic energy values can be
and showing that systems of a particular type carry periodic orbits of all
energies. This class of systems includes those describing the motion of a charge
in a magnetic field and the proposed research has potential applications to
physics and mathematical aspects of mechanics. The last part of the proposal
concerns the investigation of connections between geometrical and topological
properties of a certain class of spaces arising in the study of systems with
symmetries and in quantum mechanics.




