
* 0308040
* Geometric Variational Problems and Rearrangement Inequalities
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,06/27/2003
* Almut Burchard,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 71,688.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0308040 Principal Investigator: Almut Burchard

Two sets of problems are proposed, one related with elastic curves, and the
other with rearrangement inequalities. The first set of problems concerns the
dynamics of an elastic curve moving in three-dimensional space, under forces
determined by its curvature and subject to the constraint that it is
inextensible. The main question is whether solutions starting from sufficiently
smooth initial data exist for all time, or whether they may become singular in
finite time. For the long-time evolution of an infinite curve, solitary waves
are expected to play an important role. The boundary value problem for the
tension will be studied in detail, with the goal of obtaining sharp bounds for
the tension in terms of the position and velocity of the curve. In the second
set of problems, the PI proposes to settle a conjectured quantitative version of
the classical rearrangement inequality for the Coulomb energy. Furthermore, the
cases of equality in the Brascamp-Lieb-Luttinger inequality for multiple
integrals will be investigated. In addition, the PI participates in two
interdisciplinary collaborations, on Statistical Network Calculus and its
applications to data traffic (with colleagues from Computer Science and Systems
Engineering), and on the clustering of proteins on membranes within polarized
cells (with colleagues from Biology).

The elastic curve equations described above provide a simple example of a class
of nonlinear wave equations with geometric forces and geometric constraints. The
analytic difficulties encountered in this problem, and the techniques used to
overcome them, are expected to be relevant for more complex mechanical systems
with geometric forces. While the work is geometrically motivated, the dynamics
of elastic wires are clearly relevant to structural questions in Mechanical
Engineering. The basic well-posedness questions addressed here could have
implications for the convergence of numerical solution schemes. Rearrangement
inequalities are among the few geometric tools for minimizing nonlinear, non-
convex functionals. The proposed work strives to sharpen those tools and extend
their applicability. Implications include the stability of symmetric galaxy
configurations and other dynamical stability problems. A notable contribution of
the applied collaborations is that they expose researchers in Biology and
Engineering to the everyday use of simple, but rigorous Mathematics. The Network
Calculus results center on questions of admission control and service guarantees
in large data networks. The biological work has implication for the mechanics of
protein sorting, which is crucial to the function of the cell at a basic level.
