
* 0333172
* Hermitian Geometry of Non-Kahler Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2002,04/07/2006
* Gueo Grantcharov,FL,Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2007
* USD 50,387.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0209306. PI: Gueo Grantcharov

The project aims to study three problems of the Hermitian geometry of the
compact non-Kaehler complex manifolds: The geometry of Hermitian manifolds
admitting totally non-degenerate torus action, Hermitian structures on
Riemannian manifolds admitting many compatible complex structures and geometry
of hypercomplex manifolds and connections with totally antisymmetric torsion.
The methods of investigation include: Kodaira-Spencer-Kuranishi deformation
theory, Lichnerowicz formulas for Dirac operators and vanishing theorems,
twistor correspondence, Kaehler orbifolds, nilpotent Lie groups, moment maps for
various spaces with geometric structures, harmonic maps and others. If the
project is successful, it is expected a new examples of Einstein Hermitian
manifolds to be obtained, the existence problem of HKT structure on arbitrary
hypercomplex manifold to be solved (negatively) and some characterization or
rigidity type results for manifolds with many complex structures to be found.

The role of the abstract spaces constructed from the complex numbers in the
theoretical foundations of quantum mechanics is significant. It increases in the
development of quantum mechanic to the theory of quantum fields. A more recent
investigations in the theoretical physics are directed toward a unification of
the quantum mechanics and general relativity. This, yet hypothetical theory, is
called string theory and for a long time the Kaehler geometry of the complex
spaces has served as its mathematical foundation. In mathematics little is known
about the structure of a general non-Kaehler complex spaces. However, in the
fast-growing development of the string theory an abstract models based on the
non-Kaehler geometry appeared in the last years. Such spaces have also
additional geometrical properties which makes the study of their mathematical
structure more tractable. The investigation on the project will contribute to
the understanding of some of the mathematical problems related to these physical
models.


