
* 0405143
* Topology, Geometry and Physics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2004,05/05/2008
* Clifford Taubes,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 705,192.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0405143 Principal Investigator: Clifford H. Taubes

The research of C. H. Taubes will mostly concentrate in differential topology,
but there are three mathematical physics projects of interest as well. The
primary project involves the use of symplectic geometry tools to investigate the
differential topology of four dimensional spaces. The long range goal is to shed
light on the classification for smooth, four dimensional spaces, this one of the
outstanding open problems in low dimensional topology. As there is considerable
circumstantial evidence for a symplectic geometry role in the story, the
immediate plan is to probe the symplectic geometry connections to the subject.
The first of the mathematical physics projects aims to construct an equivariant
Fredholm setting for a Dirac operator on the loop space of a manifold. Such a
setting would provide a rigorous framework for various aspects of string-
theoretic physics. The second mathematical physics project will study the
minimal energy states for a Hartree-Fock approximation to the strong coupling
Hamiltonian for quantum chromodynamics. The third mathematical physics project
is undertaken jointly with a chemist; it studies a version of free energy for a
DNA molecule in a salt solution. The aim here is to predict the behavior of such
molecules in various biological contexts.

The major project probes the possibilities for the large scale structure of four
dimensional universes. For example, our universe has four dimensions, these the
usual three dimensions of space plus time as the fourth; and astronomers have
confirmed Einsteins prediction that our universe is curved at large scales. The
research seeks to provide a complete list of the possible large scale structures
for a four dimensional universe. As of now, there is no credible conjectured
list for the possibilities, but there are clues to its format. There are three
other research topics that are motivated by questions in mathematical physics.
The first of these seeks to confirm various conjectures from unified field
theories in physics for gravity and the subatomic forces. The second topic
explores techniques for predicting properties of the strong force that binds
subnuclear quarks as mesons, neutrons and protons. The third topic studies
equations from physical chemistry that predict the behavior of DNA molecules in
various biological contexts. The goal is to develop tools to simplify the
calculations.
