
* 0405271
* Gauge Theory and Geometry in Dimensions Three and Four
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2004,05/22/2008
* Peter Kronheimer,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 549,744.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0405271 Principal Investigator: Peter B. Kronheimer

The aim of this project is to apply gauge-theory techniques to the study of
three-dimensional manifolds. The principal investigator proposes to investigate
Floer homology and closely related areas of geometry, and hopes to shed light on
the applicability of gauge theory to problems in three-dimensional topology and
geometry. Potential applications of gauge theory include a proof of the
"Property P conjecture", which states that a non-trivial surgery on a non-
trivial knot cannot yield a simply-connected 3-manifold. There are expected to
be other applications of Floer homology to questions about surgery on knots. As
part of this program, the principal investigator will complete a thorough
investigation of the foundations of Seiberg-Witten Floer homology. A similar
study of the closely-related instanton Floer homology is at present obstructed
by difficulties stemming from the non-compactness of instanton moduli spaces.
The principal investigator intends to examine these obstructions with a view
towards having a more complete instanton Floer theory.

Topology is the qualitative study of space and its connectedness. Its importance
was recognized at the turn of the last century by the French mathematician
Poincare, during his investigation of the laws of motion that govern the
movement of a three-body system such as the Earth, Moon and Sun moving according
to Newton's laws. In the past twenty years, topology has seen applications in
questions such as the knotting of proteins and DNA, and in modern theories of
high-energy physics. The topology of three-dimensional spaces, as opposed to
those of higher dimension, is of particular subtlety. Through this project, it
is hoped to bring new techniques to bear on outstanding questions in three-
dimensional topology. These techniques -- gauge theory and the Seiberg-Witten
equations -- originated in physics, where they had potential application to
fundamental questions such as quark confinement. They have been an effective
tool in the study of four-dimensional spaces (such as our space-time). The aim
now is to apply the same techniques to questions in dimension three.
