
* 0405578
* Geometry of Conformal and Quasiconformal Mappings
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2004,08/02/2004
* Christopher Bishop,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0405578 Principal Investigator: Christopher Bishop

The PI, Christopher Bishop, will study the geometric properties of conformal and
quasiconformal mappings, focusing on the interactions between conformal
structures, hyperbolic geometry, low dimensional topology and numerical
analysis. For example, Moore's theorem states that if we take a certain
collection of sets on the 2-sphere and topologically collapse them to points
then we obtain a new topological sphere. The PI will investigate when the
quotient map can be conformal and will consider a number of concrete problems
from this general perspective, including conformal welding, characterizations of
John domains, Koebe's conjecture, construction of Kleinian groups and other
dynamical objects. The PI will continue his earlier work on the geometry of
Kleinian limit sets and the behavior of the dimension as we deform the limit
set. The PI will also continue his work on the connections between computational
geometry, hyperbolic geometry and conformal mappings, and seek new algorithms
which compute the Riemann mapping quickly and with rigorous error estimates. In
particular he will investigate computing conformal maps using the medial axis
(an object from computational geometry) which is closely linked to 3-dimensional
hyperbolic geometry via convex hulls.

Conformal mappings are important both for their central role in numerous
mathematical problems (complex analysis, dynamical systems,...) and in various
applications (fluid flow, brain mapping, statistical physics, numerical analysis
of differential equations,...), so we must have a good theoretical understanding
of these maps and good methods for computing them in practice. The proposal
deepens our theoretical understanding of conformal maps by investigating new
connections with other parts of mathematics and computer science (point set
topology, 3-dimensional hyperbolic geometry, Voronoi diagrams) and seeks to use
these connections to invent new algorithms for computing conformal maps. For
example, the medial axis is a widely studied object in computer science (it is a
description of the shape on an object which has numerous applications in pattern
recognition, robotic motion, biology,...). The PI discovered it can also be used
to give a rough but fast approximation to conformal maps. The PI will seek to
improve this method, giving better algorithms for conformal maps and also
developing a better understanding of the medial axis which will impact its other
applications (for example, the medial axis can change drastically when the
object being described changes only a little; this is a serious computational
problem which can be addressed by thinking of the medial axis as an object in
hyperbolic geometry instead of the usual Euclidean geometry). The connection
between the medial axis and conformal maps may also lead to new ideas for
studying applications in three dimensions (where conformal mappings do not
exist, but maps based on the medial axis still do). Three dimensional problems
are the most important for applications, but our understanding lags far behind
the two dimensional case, so new two dimensional ideas which generalize to
higher dimensions are important.
