
* 0405695
* Minimal surfaces and geometric analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2004,04/28/2008
* William Minicozzi,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 432,002.00

MS-0405695 Title: Minimal surfaces and geometric analysis PI: William P.
Minicozzi, Johns Hopkins University

ABSTRACT

We will continue our investigations on minimal surfaces and related areas of
geometric analysis, including geometric evolution equations such as the mean
curvature and Ricci flow, and on function theory. Some of our main results for
minimal surfaces so far - the lamination theorem and the one-sided curvature
estimate - are for properly embedded minimal disks. Recent years have seen
breakthroughs on many long--standing problems in the theory of minimal surfaces,
with important contributions from many mathematicians. The lamination theorem
and the one-sided curvature estimate described here have played a key role and
have been used by many people. Two of the important new directions are removing
the assumption of properness and considering minimal surfaces with more general
topological types. These results will have important implications. The field of
minimal surfaces dates back to early work of Euler in 1744 and Lagrange in 1762
and has remained a vibrant area of research for the last 250 years. Minimal
surfaces appear frequently throughout science, dating back at least to the soap
film experiments of the Belgian physicist Plateau in the first half of the
nineteenth century. Their mathematical impact has been significant and has led
to developments in geometry, topology, and partial differential equations. The
subject has seen major developments recently, including answers to some long-
standing open questions and a rather complete picture for properly embedded
minimal disks (such as the helicoid which was originally discovered in 1776).
However, much less is known when these assumptions are removed; understanding
this is a key part of our research and the answers are likely to lead to further
developments.
