
* 0405994
* Symplectic Topology, Symplectic Submanifolds and Floer Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2004,08/12/2004
* Ely Kerman,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2005
* USD 86,413.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0405994 Principal Investigator: Ely Kerman

This proposal is comprised of three projects which concern the relation between
various invariants of a symplectic manifold and the periodic orbits of the
Hamiltonian flows which it supports. Recent work by Kerman shows that one of
these invariants, the Hofer-Zehnder capacity, is finite for tubular
neighborhoods of certain symplectic submanifolds. Using a decomposition theorem
of Biran, this implies several new kinds of symplectic intersection phenomena
for compact Kahler manifolds. The goal of the first project is to study these
new intersection results which suggest that many basic symplectic properties of
a compact Kahler manifold are determined by the Biran decompositions it admits.
The second project is a joint effort with V.L. Ginzburg and B. Gurel. It
involves the construction of a generalized version of Hamiltonian Floer homology
in which periodic orbits in different homotopy classes are allowed to interact
via a generalized Floer differential that counts perturbed holomorphic curves
with punctures. The construction is motivated by the Symplectic Field Theory of
Eliashberg, Givental and Hofer. The resulting theory should also have a rich
algebraic structure, as well as a variety of applications including new
calculations of the Hofer-Zehnder capacity for weakly-exact symplectic
manifolds. The third project is a program to prove a conjecture which asserts
the existence of periodic orbits on all level sets near a nondegenerate
symplectic critical submanifold of a Hamiltonian. This is a generalization of
some similar conjectures of Arnold which concern periodic orbits of a charged
particle moving in a magnetic field. The first step is to construct a Floer-type
invariant for the underlying variational principle. Once it is rigorously
defined, this should quickly lead to many new existence results. It is also
hoped that this invariant can be used to augment Symplectic Field Theory by
allowing one to split a symplectic manifold along certain hypersurfaces which
are not of contact type.

Hamiltonian flows are used to model many important physical systems in which
energy is conserved. Such systems include planets and satellites moving under
their mutual gravitational attraction, a charged particle moving in an electro-
magnetic field, and the flow of an incompressible ideal fluid. These motions are
often quite complex and one way to begin to understand their global behavior is
to look for repeating patterns, i.e., periodic orbits. While most Hamiltonian
flows have many periodic orbits, it is usually a difficult problem to establish
their existence at a fixed energy level. This problem is a central theme in the
study of Hamiltonian flows and, in modern times, has been shown to be deeply
related to the shape of the space on which the flow is defined. The projects in
this proposal study various aspects of this relation. In the first two projects
we use Hamiltonian flows to define and compute symplectic invariants. The last
project involves the construction of a new symplectic invariant which should
lead to new existence results for periodic orbits of Hamiltonian flows which
describe the motion of a charged particle in a magnetic field.


