
* 0406077
* Integrable systems and Gromov-Witten theory of non-orientable surfaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2004,07/19/2004
* Motohico Mulase,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0406077 Principal Investigator: Motohico Mulase

The proposed project is aimed at generalizing one of the recent developments in
the area of Gromov-Witten theory of compact Riemann surfaces to the case of non-
orientable surfaces. In the area of complex and symplectic geometry, integrable
systems, and mathematical physics, amazing new developments have been achieved
in recent years. At the time of their discovery in 1985, Donaldson invariants of
differentiable four manifolds, Jones polynomials of knots and links, and
Gromov's idea of pseudo- holomorphic curves were considered as independent
entities. Since the time of Atiyah's provocative lecture in 1988, their hidden
inter-relations have been emerged. Through the work of many mathematicians and
physicists, a clearer picture of the connection of these theories is revealed.
Most recently, more direct relations have been discovered, through calculation
of the generating function of these invariants and their association with
integrable systems and representation theory. Among them is the work of Okounkov
and Pandharipande, who determined the Gromov-Witten invariants of an arbitrary
compact Riemann surface as the target space. Their fundamental results include a
proof of the conjectured Virasoro constraints, identification of the generating
function of the invariants of the Riemann sphere as a solution to the two-
dimensional Toda lattice equations through Fermionic Fock representation, and a
new proof of the Witten-Kontsevich theory of intersection of cohomology classes
on the moduli space of Riemann surfaces. We propose to establish Gromov-Witten
theory of real algebraic curves without boundary, and obtain the counterpart of
the above theorems for the case of non-orientable surfaces.

The topological and geometric structures of various kinds of spaces have
attracted intensive research in mathematics and mathematical physics for many
decades. Poincare's idea on homology and homotopy theories have proven to be
useful throughout the 20th century. The applications of these theories are seen
in physics, chemistry, and understanding the dynamical properties of DNA. Only
toward the end of the previous century mathematics has encountered a true
generalization of the ideas of Poincare, applicable to the particularly
interesting spaces (called symplectic manifolds) that appear naturally in any
kinds of mechanics and dynamics. The new invariants, known as the Gromov-Witten
invariants of symplectic spaces, have shown extremely mysterious connections to
almost all areas of mathematics. Mathematicians feel quite happily that they
understand the homology and homotopy theories very well. Compared to that level,
our current understanding of the Gromov-Witten theory is at the best very
limited, and the whole subject is still filled with mysteries. We believe that
to have a deeper understanding of the theory, we should generalize it further
and include the consideration of new cases never done before. The proposed
project is aimed at discovering a generalization of the theory in a particular
context, using non-orientable surfaces.
