
* 0406209
* Regularity questions in the geometric calculus of variations and in geometric flow problems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2004,06/13/2008
* Leon Simon,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 378,164.00

Proposal DMS-0406209

Abstract ``Regularity questions in the geometric calculus of variations and in
geometric flow problems'' (Leon Simon and Brian White)

Leon Simon plans to pursue various questions related to the structure of the
singular sets of minimal submanifolds and energy minimizing maps. More
specifically Simon aims to establish first order regularity (i.e. that the
singular set lies in a locally finite union of continuously differentiable
submanifolds) for various multiplicity 1 classes near points where there is a
tangent cylinder with a cross-section which admits a calibration. Such a result
would in particular apply to mod-2 minimizers near ``top-dimensional'' singular
points. Brian White plans to study regularity properties of mean curvature flow,
including non-uniqueness properties and ``fattening.'' In addition he will
continue his work on the singular structure of minimizing cones with
coefficients in a metric group, and his work on 2 dimensional minimal surfaces
with particular emphasis on the study of branch points.

An understanding of singularities, and how singularities are formed, is a
fundamental element in our overall understanding of many physical and geometric
phenomena. For example, in cosmology singularities of space-time (e.g. ``black
holes'') play a fundamental role, and the understanding of singularity formation
in geometric flow problems is a key ingredient in the approach of Hamilton,
Perelman and others to Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture. Likewise in the
study of the ``canonical'' objects which arise naturally in topology and
geometry, singularities arise in a very natural and unavoidable manner, and the
understanding of these singularities is an absolutely fundamental problem. As
with most non-linear phenomena, there is not a single general theory which
applies in a wide range of different contexts. Rather, each different context
has its own collection of effective techniques, and it is the development and
application of such techniques in the context of the geometric calculus of
variations which is the focus of the present research proposal. Specifically,
Simon and White propose to continue their efforts toward a more complete
understanding of singularities, and how they are formed, in the context of area
minimizing submanifolds and energy minimizing maps, and in the context of
various geometric flow problems.
