
* 0412166
* Geometry and Dynamics in Riemannian and Finsler Spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2004,05/07/2008
* Dmitri Burago,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 519,545.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0412166 Principal Investigator: Dmitri Burago

D. Burago proposes to continue his work on a number of long-term projects in
Riemannian and Finsler geometry, dynamical systems of geometric origin, and
geometric group theory. The projects include: geometry of periodic metrics,
area-minimizing surfaces in normed spaces and minimal fillings, and ellipticity
of surface area functionals; low dimensional partially hyperbolic
diffeomorphisms; unbounded bi-invariant quasi-semi-norms and "large" groups;
manifolds without conjugate points; applications of singular geometry to
dynamics of billiard systems and certain algorithmic problems of geometric
origin; and approximations by PL-isometries. Among the problems the proposal is
aimed at there are: Busemann's Conjecture that flats are area-minimizing
surfaces in normed spaces; styding the structure of the class of partially-
hyperbolic systems; finding weak versions of Hofer's norm (possibly on some
groups of volume-preserving homeomorphisms); various generalizations of E.Hopf's
conjecture on tori without conjugate points. This project continues the
proposer's previous research, including a solution of the E. Hopf conjecture on
tori without conjugate points posed by Hedlund and Morse in the 40s, a
"Boltzman-Sinaj" problem on the existence of uniform estimates on the number of
collisions in hard ball gas models, the two-dimensional case of H. Busemann's
problem mentioned above, H. Furstenberg's problem on the existence of bi-
Lipschits non-equivalent separated nets and J. Moser's problem on the existence
of a continuous function that is not a Jacobian determinant of a Lipschits
homeomorphism (all from the 60s). The conjectures and directions of research
suggested in the proposal grew from ideas and methods developed by the proposer
and his collaborators while working on these problems.

Even though most topics of the proposal belong to rather abstract areas of
mathematics, their motivations lie in real-word problems. The physical analogs
of large-scale invariants of periodic metrics are macroscopic properties of
periodic media (such as crystal substances: i.e., the rate of propagation of
radiation etc), and one wants to relate these properties to microscopic
characteristics. Hyperbolic dynamics is really well understood, and it forms the
first and the simplest example of chaotic models; however, little is know about
partially hyperbolic systems, which offer a much more realistic model; the
project is aimed in giving new insight into such systems with a small number of
degrees of freedom. The "Boltzman-Sinaj" problem on the existence of uniform
estimates on the number of collisions in hard ball gas models originated from
the most basic research in statistical physics. Study of the geodesic flows,
billiard systems, geometric complexity, and optimal strategies may result in
better understanding of (stability) of certain models in thermodynamics,
biology, sociology, and physics, especially when dealing with imprecise data,
and perhaps result in new computational algorithms.
