
* 0420432
* Geometric rigidity for maps, foliations, and boundary structures of nonpositively curved spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2003,07/25/2006
* Christopher Connell,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 63,680.00

DMS 0306594- PI: Christopher Connell ABSTRACT

GEOMETRIC RIGIDITY FOR MAPS, FOLIATIONS, AND BOUNDARY STRUCTURES OF
NONPOSITIVELY CURVED SPACES

The PI plans to establish rigidity results for manifolds, foliations, and
quasiconformal structures associated with nonpositively curved spaces. There are
two main components of this project. The first is to broaden the scope of Mostow
rigidity by giving new characterizations of locally symmetric spaces of
noncompact type. Our proposed methods focus on expanding the sharp relationship
between volume, entropy and the degree of maps initiated in its current form by
work of Besson, Courtois and Gallot. We then wish to extend weaker forms of this
relationship to spaces admitting nontrivial maps into nonpositively curved
targets. The second component involves understanding the connection between
quasiconformal structures and special geometric measures which live on the
boundary of most Hadamard spaces. The initial steps toward this goal also play
an important role in the first component. In the effort to establish these
results, we aim to significantly enhance our understanding of the interaction
between the geometry, topology and geodesic dynamics of such spaces.

Based on a long standing principle, researchers have come to expect that the
most efficient solutions to analytic problems are often achieved by those
objects which have the most symmetry. For instance, the modern version of a
conjecture by Pappus of Alexandria asserts that the circle is "rigid:" any other
curve enclosing a region of the plane with the same area must have longer length
than the circle. This was finally proved in 1841. In higher dimensions, the
analogous result turns out to be true for the spheres of constant positive
curvature. We can ask related questions about nonpositively curved spaces; these
have the property that the sum of the angles of any small triangle does not
exceed 180 degrees. We propose to show that most nonpositively curved spaces
with a sufficient amount of symmetry exhibit similar rigid behavior, but of a
more intrinsic nature. Moreover, we expect many nonpositively curved spaces
which are not symmetric to also exhibit a sort of weak rigidity. From such
results, we can partly determine the rough shape of many asymmetrical spaces,
regardless of curvature, and even draw some purely algebraic conclusions related
to their underlying structure. This naturally leads to dynamical information
arising, for instance, from the physical interpretation of these objects as
phase spaces.
