
* 0503868
* Global Invariants for CR Geometry and Isolated Singularities
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2005,05/12/2005
* Stephen S. Yau,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2009
* USD 169,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0503868 Principal Investigator: Stephen S.T. Yau

This research proposal contains projects in five areas: (1) Fundamental problem
in CR geometry, (2) Explicit computation of CR automorphism groups, (3)
Simultaneous embedding problem for a CR family of compact CR manifolds, (4)
Deformation of CR manifolds and deformation of isolated singularities, (5)
Holomorphic De Rham cohomology and complex Plateau problem. Yau introduces a new
Bergman function for any strongly pseudoconvex complex manifold, which is
invariant under biholomorphic maps. He intends to use this Bergman function to
study the CR equivalent problem of strongly pseudoconvex CR manifolds lying on
the same variety with isolated normal singularities. He developed a new
technique to define a continuous numerical invariant on strongly pseudoconvex CR
manifolds lying on the same variety. He shows that his invariant varies
continuously in R when the CR structure of strongly pseudoconvex CR manifold
changes in the variety. Yau observes that his new Bergman functions put a lot of
restriction on biholomorphic maps between strongly pseudoconvex CR manifold,
from which the automorphism groups of the CR manifolds can be determined
explicitly. He illustrates how this works in a concrete example. The proposed
work in (3) builds on his joint work with Xiaojun Huang and Hing Sun Luk on
simultaneous embedding of CR manifolds. It will be done in collaboration with
Xiaojun Huang. They intend to use their prior work on further extensions to
study the most subtle problem on simultaneous embedding of 3-dimensional CR
manifolds. Yau plans to use the techniques developed in (1) and (3) above to
understand the relation between the Kuranishi family of CR manifolds and versal
deformation of isolated normal singularities in a more concrete manner. Finally
the work in (5) is part of Yau's ongoing project on holomorphic De Rham
cohomology and complex Plateau problem. He has shown that the vanishing of
holomorphic De Rham cohomology of the CR manifold X gives a lot of restriction
on the singularities of the variety which X bounds. He plans to use his result
to solve the clasical complex Plateau problem for 3-dimensional strongly
pseudoconvex CR manifolds in 3-dimensional complex Euclidean space.

This research proposal has an important theme of unifying different fields such
as CR Geometry, Complex Analysis, Singularities Theory and Algebraic Geometry
together. The philosophy and technique of the proposal will also be useful in
biotechnology. With the completion of human genomic sequence, it is an urgent
task to accurate identify protein coding regions (exons) from genomic sequence.
Similar to Yau's proposal, one can try to find numerical characters of exons
which introns do not have. In this way, one may be able to identify all possible
human proteins. The next important task is to predict the properties of these
newly discovered proteins. Using the similar technique developed in Yau's
proposal, one may able to represent each protein as a point in certain
n-dimensional space. Proteins which are closed to each other in this space
should have similar properties. In this way, one can predict some properties of
newly found proteins. Biologists can do experiment to verify these properties.
