
* 0503506
*  Differential equations and the geometry of manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2005,05/09/2005
* Jeff Viaclovsky,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2007
* USD 129,065.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0503506 Principal Investigator: Jeff A. Viaclovsky

The first project supported by this award deals with compactness results for
certain classes of Riemannian metrics in dimension four, particularly for anti-
self-dual metrics and extremal Kaehler metrics. With certain geometric
noncollapsing assumptions, the appropriate moduli spaces can be compactified by
adding metrics with generalized orbifold singularities. A long-term goal of this
project is to use this compactification to define new smooth invariants of four-
manifolds. The second project considers conformal deformations of metrics,
certain fully nonlinear curvature equations, and relations with Riemannian
functions in dimensions three and four. A crucial problem in this direction is
to prescribe a symmetric function of the eigenvalues of the Ricci tensor,
generalizing the Yamabe problem.

A recurring theme in geometry is the relationship between topology, a soft or
stretchy version of the shape of a space, and the possible geometries on that
space. In the same way that the familiar round geometry on the two-dimensional
sphere is more appealing and geometrically distinctive than any of the nearby
geometries obtained by pushing in or pulling small regions on the sphere, one
likes to hope that most manifolds of low dimensions will carry geometries that
are somehow optimal - especially symmetric geometries, or minimizers for some
sort of total energy measurement. The projects described above seek to discover
such optimal or extremal geometries in some important three- and four-
dimensional cases.
