
* 0505767
* Geometry from Physics: Calabi-Yau Spaces and the Positive Mass Conjecture
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2005,07/08/2005
* Anda Degeratu,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 92,443.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0505767 Principal Investigator: Anda Degeratu

A variety of questions in geometry arise from physics. Consistency requirements
in superstring theory suggest that we live in a 10-dimensional world, where the
extra six dimensions must take the shape of a Calabi-Yau geometry. For the past
20 years, this has led to a tremendous effort on the part of mathematicians and
physicists to understand Calabi-Yau spaces, and the various questions which
emerge from their role in string theory. On the other hand, more classical areas
of physics such as general relativity continue to motivate interesting questions
in Riemannian geometry. In particular, extending the Positive Mass Conjecture
has important implications for geometric analysis and string theory.

The first two projects in this proposal examine the geometry of Calabi-Yau
spaces. In studying such objects, one has to take into consideration singular
Calabi-Yaus. One way to deal with singularities is to resolve them. As a result,
the geometrical structure undergoes changes. The goal of the first research
project is to give a complete characterization of the changes which can occur
under crepant resolutions. In contrast to more traditional algebraic methods,
the proposed techniques for this study involve an interplay between algebraic
and analytical methods. Another way to deal with Calabi-Yau singularities is to
analyze them from the perspective of various string theory dualities. In the
second project, the PI proposes to study the taxonomy of Calabi-Yau spaces for
which heterotic/F-theory dualities hold. Along the way, it is hoped that this
study will give a geometrical interpretation to a new conjecture of McKay which
relates the exceptional simply-laced Dynkin diagrams to the Monster group and
its offspring. The focus of the third project is the Positive Mass Conjecture.
In the context of general relativity it has been proved that the total mass of
an isolated system is never negative, provided that the sources of the
gravitational field consist of matter with nonnegative local mass density and
that spacetime is asymptotically flat. Witten's proof is based on the analysis
of the Dirac operator along three-dimensional spacelike submanifolds in
spacetime. The goal of this research is to extend Witten's approach to prove the
Positive Mass Conjecture in any dimension, in particular for non-spin manifolds.

To summarize, an assortment of questions in mathematics lie at the interface
between geometry and physics. This proposal focuses on geometry problems which
do not fit nicely into one particular field, but require a variety of techniques
from different branches of geometry. Many of these problems come from physics,
where ad-hoc methods need further development.
