
* 0505920
* Singularity Models for Ricci Flow
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2005,07/21/2005
* Dan Knopf,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2008
* USD 108,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0505920 Principal Investigator: Dan F. Knopf

The project will advance the search for canonical geometries by means of
geometric heat flows. In light of the landmark progress made recently by
Perelman in Hamilton's program to resolve the Geometrization and Poincare'
Conjectures, this research area is undergoing a rapid and productive expansion.
The powerful innovations and profound insights in Perelman's work contribute to
the extraordinary power of Ricci flow as a tool for investigating the geometry
and topology of Riemannian and complex manifolds. In virtually all known
applications of Ricci flow, it is critical to have a deep understanding of the
mechanisms of singularity formation. Therefore, the project will investigate
four aspects of singularity formation. These four objectives are chosen to build
upon the prior results and current research program of the PI and to be highly
relevant to promising new applications of Ricci flow. The objectives are to
study (1) asymptotics of Ricci flow singularity formation, (2) analysis of Ricci
flow singularities in dimension four, (3) analysis of singularity models for
Kaehler-Ricci flow, and (4) the structure of reduced geometry.

A manifold is an object that - like our universe - looks like Euclidean space
locally, but whose global topology and geometry may be much different. The broad
goals of this project are to find optimal geometric structures with which to
categorize manifolds. The methods used are certain partial differential
equations called geometric heat flows. The idea is to let a geometric object
evolve in time in such a way that its geometry improves and simplifies, possibly
after a change in topology. A geometric heat flow called the Ricci flow has just
yielded major breakthroughs in two of the most difficult open problems in
mathematics. These successes provide great incentives to apply it to other
challenging open problems and make it a very active and competitive field of
research. The types of partial differential equations studied in Ricci flow have
much in common with those used to model the movement of oil in shale and in thin
films, combustion in porous media, heat propagation, avalanches, population
dispersal, the spreading of microscopic droplets, and certain effects in plasma
physics. For this reason, methods developed in this project may have important
applications to those areas of applied mathematics. The project will focus on
the delicate analysis needed to understand such equations as they become
singular. This analysis should have important broad applications, among which
are the following. (i) The methods developed, especially asymptotic analysis,
should extend to the practical applications mentioned above. (ii) The project
will promote interdisciplinary interactions with physics, where there are many
applications for geometric classification and flow techniques. For example,
theorists in general relativity want to classify possible topologies of four-
dimensional space-times. Researchers in string theory and mirror symmetry are
interested in understanding certain six-dimensional manifolds. The Ricci flow
itself is an approximation to the renormalization flow for an important model in
quantum field theory. (iii) The project will benefit graduate education, because
the PI will invest time helping students develop expertise in relevant areas of
geometry, analysis, and topology.
