
* 0505669
* Topological Field Theory and Integrable Systems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/15/2005,07/06/2005
* Ezra Getzler,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 108,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0505669 Principal Investigator: Ezra Getzler

In this proposal, we study an important mathematical problem suggested by string
theory: the construction of a theory of secondary Gromov-Witten invariants. In
other words, an analogue of rational homotopy theory for Floer homology. While
the ideas of rational homotopy theory have been extensively applied in algebraic
topology, they have not received much attention in the study of Gromov-Witten
invariants, or more generally, of topological field theory; this proposal
attempts to rectify this. We will examine whether an analogue of formality holds
for compact Kaehler targets. Our results will be formulated in terms of our
theory of homotopy Gerstenhaber algebras, and Tamarkin and Tsygan's theory of
homotopy Batalin-Vilkovisky algebras.

In a sense, this proposal addresses the difficult problem of understanding the
mathematical formulation of string theory, which is itself a very promising
descriptions of the fundamental laws of nature. Throughout its forty year
history, string theory has drawn on the insights of modern mathematics. But
there is a sense among researchers that the final formulation of the theory has
not yet been attained: we believe that this proposal will bring us closer to
finding the mathematical language which is needed for such a description.
