
* 0505557
* Moduli and Limits of Minimal Surfaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2005,05/15/2007
* Matthias Weber,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2010
* USD 214,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0505557 Principal Investigator: Matthias Weber

This research project aims to combine two powerful new methods to investigate
moduli spaces of complete, properly embedded minimal surfaces in euclidean space
and their limits: Flat cone metrics are a geometric way to represent Riemann
surfaces together with a (possibly multivalued) meromorphic 1-form, giving
immediate information about the periods of the form. In combination with
Teichmuller theory, cone metrics have been applied to existence and
classification problems of mimimal surfaces. Noded surfaces are natural limits
of Riemann surfaces under conformal pinching of curves. They have been used to
construct families of minimal surfaces that degenerate to a suitable noded
limit, using the implicit function theorem. We aim for a description of the
noded limits of minimal surfaces as geometric limits of flat cone metrics. This
adds a third type of limit to the formerly considered geometric and conformal
limits. The conformal limits ignore the minimal surface information and consider
only the Riemann surface limit, while the geometric limit retain the minimal
surface nature but loose conformal and topological information by rescaling the
surfaces in space. The new cone metric limit will incorporate both types of
information. We hope that this description will lead to new examples and
classification results. This research will be backed by numerical and graphical
experiments based on a minimal surface library currently under development.

Minimal surfaces are mathematical abstractions of 2-dimensional shapes that
arise at different scales in nature: We are all familiar with soap film
experiments, but such surfaces also have been observed at the nano scale as
interfaces between block copolymers. Their mathematical properties are important
for understanding the physical nature of new fabrics. The physical goal to
minimize surface tension translates into a mathematical equation which has been
of interest for over 250 years: The minimal surface equation is just at the
border between what we understand by general theory and what we only can analyze
numerically. Any advance at this point will most likely have its effects on
other equations from mathematical physics and engineering. The methods which are
being used to investigate minimal surfaces range from geometric analysis to
numerical mathematics. Recent theoretical advances from partial differential
equations and Teichmuller theory allow us to study 'extreme' minimal surfaces
which comparable to soap films that nearly break under deformations.
Understanding these extreme surfaces not only helps us to analyze the examples
we have by breaking them apart into simpler pieces but also allows the
construction of exciting new surfaces by putting suitable pieces together. The
computer experiments we conduct require elaborate symbolic manipulations of the
formulas involved, high-precision numerical computations to get accurate
3-dimensional surface data, and high performance computer graphics to visualize
the actual surfaces.
