
* 0505778
* Holomorphic Curves in Symplectic and Complex Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2005,07/21/2005
* Richard Hind,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2008
* USD 99,497.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0505778 Principal Investigator: Richard Hind

This proposal will conduct research in symplectic and complex geometry. Topics
in symplectic geometry aim to both apply and extend the ideas and theorems of
the Symplectic Field Theory as developed by Eliashberg, Givental and Hofer. The
main application so far is to the classification up to Hamiltonian
diffeomorphism of Lagrangian spheres in symplectic 4-manifolds, there is ongoing
work aimed at establishing similar results for higher genus surfaces. In
symplectic topology such classification results at present only exist in
dimension 4. Nevertheless the proposal will also strive to increase our
understanding of higher dimensions. One route to such an understanding is
provided by work of Donaldson showing that, after a blowing-up operation, every
integral symplectic 6-manifold can be realized as a Lefschetz fibration in which
the fibers are symplectic 4-manifolds and the vanishing cycles Lagrangian
spheres. Regarding the underlying theory, Symplectic Field Theory allows us to
split a symplectic manifold along a hypersurface and apply holomorphic curve
methods to study each part separately. This is a very powerful idea, the results
above rely heavily upon it, but it is fundamentally limited in that it may not
be possible to split a symplectic manifold along such hypersurfaces into pieces
which are sufficiently small to be completely understood. Therefore the proposal
will also work to generalize the Symplectic Field Theory to allow more general
splittings, for example along hypersurfaces with corners. In complex geometry
the proposal plans to continue work of Burns and Hind studying complex manifolds
canonically associated to real analytic Riemannian manifolds, focussing
especially on the case when the Riemannian manifold is a symmetric space of the
noncompact type. Then we have a class of complex manifolds which gives a nice
generalization of the classical bounded symmetric domains.

Symplectic geometry originated as the modern mathematical language of classical
and quantum mechanics. This proposal will address basic mathematical problems in
the area, in particular it will apply and extend the powerful new techniques
known as Symplectic Field Theory. The Symplectic Field Theory is an exciting new
development which promises to help us move rapidly towards our goal of
describing the global nature of symplectic manifolds and Hamiltonian systems. As
the problems are global in nature often they initially appear intractible, but
the new methods offer the prospect of breaking down our analysis into more
manageable local pieces. Eventually it should be possible to develop algorithms
to solve typical problems in symplectic geometry. This will have immediate
applications to theoretical physics and dynamical systems.
