
* 0505709
* Degenerate Microlocal Methods in Geometric Analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2005,05/21/2009
* Rafe Mazzeo,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 379,848.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0505709 Principal Investigator: Rafe Mazzzeo

The PI proposes several activities, all fitting in the framework of linear and
nonlinear elliptic problems arising in geometric analysis on noncompact and
singular manifolds. He proposes continuing his collaboration with Vasy on new
microlocal techniques for constructing the resolvent on locally symmetric spaces
of arbitrary rank. This approach has already led to a new proof of a meromorphic
continuation of this resolvent, which in turn will have applications in
scattering theory and to nonlinear elliptic equations on asymptotically
symmetric Einstein spaces. A goal of this portion of the proposal is to create
versatile methods, adapted from N-body Schroedinger theory, to open the analysis
on higher rank spaces to a purely microlocal approach. This should lead to
advances in geometric scattering theory on these spaces. The other part of the
proposal discusses deformation theory of noncompact Ricci flat Einstein spaces
and of Einstein spaces with conic singularities. Even for surfaces, the PI
expects these methods to give new results about the existence of constant
curvature and Ricci soliton metrics. Finally, the PI proposes to continue his
role as director and teacher in SUMaC, the residential summer program for
mathematically talented high school students, and also to continue his other
mentoring and outreach activities.

The overall area of research in this proposal concerns a study of the
relationship between the geometry of higher dimensional curved spaces and the
behaviour of solutions of certain natural equations on these spaces. One example
is a subject called geometric scattering theory, which seeks to describe the
behaviour of waves, measured at large timescales, and to see how these are
influenced by the curvature of the underlying space. The PI has developed
methods to study such problems on a natural class of spaces which appear in
several different branches of mathematics. Other examples include the study of
solutions to the Einstein equations, which are supposed to describe possible
configurations for the large-scale shape of space. There are many such
solutions; one way to organize them is to describe their deformation theory,
i.e. to see how they may be altered continuously. The PI proposes to study these
questions for certain of these spaces. A key novelty of his methods is the
development of techniques from a field called microlocal analysis to these
geometric problems. The nature of these topics will lead to interactions with
mathematicians in diverse areas as well as physicists, and it is hoped that the
results of this proposal may have some impact in these other areas. The PI is
also actively involved in training and mentoring at various levels. His SUMaC
program, now entering its eleventh year, is a proven success in motivating
gifted high school students to continue their mathematical studies. He has also
been active in graduate training and in collaborating with young postdoctoral
researchers.
