
* 0506207
* Conference: Singularities in Analysis and Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2005,05/16/2005
* Robert Hardt,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2006
* USD 19,970.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0506270 Principal Investigator: Robert M. Hardt and Michael Wolf

Singular objects and regularity theory for potentially singular objects have
played and continue to play an essential role in all areas of geometry, topology
and analysis. The works of F. Reese Harvey and John C. Polking, both jointly and
separately,involving the analysis and structure of singularities, have ranged
widely over all three areas. This conference, in recognition of their scholarly
and academic service, will treat important issues involving singularities raised
in their works over the last 30 years. It will focus on recent developments in
singular spaces as an outgrowth of calibrated geometries, special Lagrangian
submanifolds, removable singularity problems, and the relatively new area of
singular connections. The conference will begin with an introductory session
aimed at graduate students, recent Ph.D.'s, and non-specialist researchers. The
body of the conference will involve topics from the wide expertise of the
invited lecturers which encompass: singularities in calibrated geometries,
exceptional holonomy, CR geometry, differential characters, geometry of singular
spaces, singularities of complex submanifolds and varieties, extension problems
for analytic objects, geometric aspects of singular connections, special
Lagrangian theory, compactification of spaces of connections, and regularity
theory of harmonic maps, special Lagrangian minimizers, and Yang-Mills
connections. Finally one session of the conference will be devoted to the study
of a specific implementation of technology in the classroom.

Through mathematical models of a wide variety of phenomena from macro-economic
systems, to cosmological models of the universe, to microscopic mechanics of
solids, the notion of a "singularity" has gained prominence in the last thirty
years. It is identified with the sudden disruption in space or time of a smooth
media. It may occur at a point, as with two colliding particles, along a curve,
as with lightning, or a surface, as with an earthquake fault, or on some higher
dimensional "surface," as occurs in multi-parameter economic models. The basic
fields in pure mathematics of analysis, geometry, and topology, have all
attacked problems of understanding singularity formation and structure. This
timely conference, on the occasion of the retirement of two academic leaders,
brings together outstanding researchers and students from all these fields for a
synergistic exchange of ideas. Many of the specific topics of the lectures of
the conference have both their origins in and applications to mathematical
physics, from the Lagrangian description of classical mechanical systems
(1800's) to problems in string theory (1990's). The mathematical analysis of
singularities provides important information for not only these well-established
applications but also for new singularities arising from biological and
computational problems.
