
* 0508661
* Collaborative Research: Midwest Geometry Conference 2005-2007
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 04/15/2005,04/11/2005
* Shihshu Walter Wei,OK,University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2008
* USD 12,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 0509068, 0508661, 0509714 Principal Investigator: Thomas P. Branson,
Shihshu Walter Wei, Andrzej J. Derdzinski Institutions: University of Iowa,
University of Oklahoma, Ohio State University

The Midwest Geometry Conference has been meeting annually since 1991. Its goal
is to present recent advances in differential geometry, geometric analysis, and
integral geometry to geometers from the Midwest, including junior level
researchers and some graduate students. The main part of the program consists of
several plenary lectures given by experts in specific sub-fields (who need not
be Midwest-based); an opportunity is also provided for some of the participants
to give contributed talks. The current project provides for conferences in the
spring of 2005, 2006, and 2007 at the Ohio State University, the University of
Oklahoma and, respectively, the University of Iowa. The Ohio State conference,
planned for April 29 to May 1, 2005, will focus on three topics: positively
curved manifolds; Ricci flow, solitons and Einstein metrics; geometric group
theory. The lists of topics for the other two conferences are still tentative,
and include: symmetric criticality; p-harmonic geometry; convexity, positively
curved manifolds, and Ricci flow (Oklahoma, 2006), as well as: symmetries and
overdetermined systems of PDEs; the AdS/CFT correspondence; nonlinear hyperbolic
evolution equations; geometric scattering theory (Iowa, 2007).

The Midwest Geometry Conference is dedicated to the exchange of ideas among
members of the geometry community in the Midwest, as well as dissemination of
important research advances and ideas, nationwide and worldwide, in differential
geometry and related fields. A key objective of the conference is the attempt to
encourage researchers and potential researchers in the Midwest, especially those
who work some distance from the large research centers, as well as young people,
women, and members of underrepresented groups. "Warm-up" sessions for graduate
students and young researchers are planned for the days leading up to the
conference. At least one of the three or four focus topics at each conference is
related to applications of geometry. Historically, such applications lie
primarily in physics, with prominent examples provided by Einstein's general
theory of relativity and the currently accepted Standard Model of elementary
particles and their interactions. Other well-known applications of differential
geometry are in engineering, for example robotics. A further example pertains to
evolution equations, which are currently a subject of keen interest to
differential geometers and, at the same time, have the applied aspect of
describing how some materials, or the space itself, develop in time. A very
specific example of the latter kind is provided by the mean curvature flow. The
surface of a globule of molten plastic evolves, or adapts in time, to have the
minimum possible curvature; this evolution is completely determined by the
globule's curvature. This fundamental observation provides an understanding of a
wide range of flow problems, and allows an approach to predicting the flow. This
has immediate relevance to injection molding of materials, for example in the
dashboards and bumpers of automobiles. But the fundamental principles behind
mean curvature flow have also provided a paradigm for problems like the Ricci
flow, in which the metric properties of space itself are the quantities which
are evolving. Questions of the latter kind will be central to the coming
meetings of the Midwest Geometry Conference.
