
* 0555016
* 2006 Yamabe Memorial Symposium
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 01/15/2006,12/29/2005
* Jiaping Wang,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 18,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0555016 Principal Investigator: Jiaping Wang, Robert D. Gulliver,
Tian-Jun Li

The principal investigators propose to organize the third Yamabe Memorial
Symposium, with an emphasis on geometry and symplectic topology, at the School
of Mathematics of the University of Minnesota from Friday to Sunday, September
22-24, 2006. The list of speakers will include Denis Auroux, Yakov Eliashberg,
Mikio Furuta, Helmut Hofer, Dusa McDuff, Peter Ozsvath, Yongbin Ruan and Ronald
Stern.

Professor Hidehiko Yamabe (1923--1960) was an active and highly collaborative
mathematician in the School of Mathematics of the University of Minnesota from
1954 to 1960. His sudden illness and untimely death occured in the same year
that he moved to Northwestern University. His work on topological groups,
geometry and analysis were outstanding contributions to modern mathematics. In
year 2001, we proposed to enhance the Yamabe Memorial Lecture by creating the
Yamabe Memorial Symposium, a top-level biennial geometry conference in the
School of Mathematics, University of Minnesota. Every two years, perhaps in the
Fall of even-numbered years, mathematicians will gather at the University of
Minnesota for a long weekend to hear geometry talks, discuss the latest research
and interact with graduate students and junior researchers. In each biennium, a
specific area within geometry will be singled out for special emphasis. One goal
will be, as a way to honor the memory of Hidehiko Yamabe, to advance areas of
mathematics related to his interests, which touched in a substantial and ground-
breaking way on several quite different areas of mathematics, all of which may
be roughly described as having significant geometric aspects. At the same time,
it will provide a valuable opportunity for graduate students and junior
researchers to interact with, and learn from, mathematicians working at the
highest international level. Finally, a long-lasting benefit will be the
stimulation of innovative developments in mathematics research.

The conference web page is http://www.math.umn.edu/yamabe/.
