
* 0601141
* Geometric and Probabilistic Problems from Low Dimensional Gauge Theories
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, COFFES
* 06/01/2006,05/30/2006
* Ambar Sengupta,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2011
* USD 125,726.00

This project is devoted to mathematical problems arising from quantum physics,
in particular from the study of forces between the fundamental constituents of
matter. The fields of interest for this project include Yang-Mills fields, which
mediate interaction between fundamental particles of nature. These fields are
modeled mathematically by the geometric notion of connections. These are
fundamental to the study of both gravitation and the interactions of elementary
particles of nature. The quantum behavior of such fields is described
mathematically in terms of functional integrals. Investigations, begun in large
part through the work of G. "t Hooft in the early 1970s, have found a wealth of
deeper structures and ideas in the behavior of such integrals when the physical
field's symmetry size, described by a number N, is large. One direction being
proposed in the project is the development of a mathematically complete
description of this large-N 'master field.' An area known as free probability
theory is expected to play a central role here. Other directions, involving
generally the same areas of mathematics, will also be pursued.

The project aims to discover new mathematical results and structures, such as a
generalized geometry arising from the limiting large-N theory, which are
inspired by physical theories. The mathematical contexts range from differential
geometry to stochastics and large random matrices. The research work on this
project is expected to have a positive impact on graduate and undergraduate
education through seminars and lectures to be arranged in the course of the
project. The project would involve international research collaboration. In a
broader intellectual plane, the project would produce a fruitful combination of
ideas from the frontiers of physics and mathematics.
