
* 0602191
* EMSW21-RTG: Training the Research Workforce in Geometry, Topology and Dynamics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 08/01/2006,05/19/2010
* Ralf Spatzier,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2012
* USD 2,499,218.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0602191 Principal Investigator: Ralf Spatzier, Mario Bonk, Richard D.
Canary, John E. Fornaess, Juha M. Heinonen

This proposal calls for a research training program in geometry, topology and
dynamics at the University of Michigan. Recent Ph.D.'s and advanced graduate
students will be the main beneficiaries. The Mathematics Department at UM has
one of the largest and most vigorous post-doctoral and graduate programs in the
country with an excellent record of producing high-quality researchers in
geometry, topology and dynamics. This proposal calls to bolster the training of
post-docs and graduate students in all of these areas by deepening and
broadening it and providing them with ample opportunities to excel in their
research. Five faculty members (Mario Bonk, Richard Canary, John Erik Fornaess,
Juha Heinonen and Ralf Spatzier) will lead this project in collaboration with
eleven other senior faculty. The proposal calls for several specific innovations
in the training program by: providing intensive exploratory seminars and
workshops, travel semesters to deepen the scientific training at other
insitutions at the forefront of research, opportunities to develop lecturing
skills, intensive mentoring and exposure to research in the three areas to
undergraduates.

Geometry, topology and dynamical systems are core areas of mathematics. Geometry
investigates the shape of spaces, through invariants such as curvature. Topology
explores the properties of spaces which remain invariant under deformations such
as the number of holes in a surface. Dynamical systems concern the evolution of
a physical or mathematical system over time. Especially in recent years, they
have developed in mutually beneficial interaction. Case in point are topology,
geometry and complex dynamics in low dimension which in many aspects mirror each
other. Many of the most exciting developments in these areas are truly
interrelated, and benefit from each other either by idea, analogy or actual
tool. At the same time, connections with other fields such as algebraic geometry
and mathematical physics have strengthened dramatically. These developments have
been amazing in their breadth and depth, and demonstrate the vitality of these
areas. This project will train young researchers in these exciting and
interconnected fields, and will help insure their future health and continued
interaction.
