
* 0604735
* Geometric Structures on Low Dimensional Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2006,05/07/2008
* Michael Anderson,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 562,001.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0604735 Principal Investigator: Michael T. Anderson, Claude R. LeBrun

Working both jointly and independently, Anderson and LeBrun plan to study a
cluster of related geometric structures on low-dimensional manifolds. Their
research program focuses on relationships linking geometry to topological
structures, algebraic geometry, and theoretical physics. Jointly, Anderson and
LeBrun plan to study the existence and moduli of canonical metrics on
4-manifolds, with an emphasis on the Kahler case. Anderson will also investigate
problems concerning asympotically hyperbolic Einstein metrics, the AdS/CFT
correspondence, and mathematical aspects of general relativity. LeBrun will also
study the curvature of 4-manifolds, Seiberg-Witten theory, extremal Kahler
metrics, and the twistor geometry of holomorphic disks. The proposed work is
expected to have a significant broader impact on two different fronts. On one
hand, it will promote further interactions between researchers in differential
geometry and those in topology, in algebraic geometry and, especially, in
theoretical physics. The project also has a significant educational impact at
the graduate level, in that Anderson and LeBrun oversee a large number of
graduate students who are working on problems closely tied to the research
proposal.

The relations between mathematics and theoretical physics are at the forefront
of research in both disciplines, leading on both sides to remarkable new
insights and developments. Much of the planned research activity takes its
inspiration from current attempts to bridge the gulf between Einstein's theory
of space-time geometry and gravitation (General Relativity), and the quantum
field theories that are currently understood to govern the other fundamental
forces of nature. Some of the research has to do with the problem of describing
all possible geometries of 4-dimensional universes governed by Einstein's
gravitational equations. One of the toolsto be used involves use of the Seiberg-
Witten equations, which originated in the theory of short-range nuclear
interactions, but nonetheless turn out to play a major role in our understanding
of the large-scalestructure of many 4-dimensional universes. Other aspects of
the planned research are closely linked to developments in string theory, which
is arguably the most promising and exciting avenue of research in theoretical
physics, and which has had a profound and multi-faceted impact on recent
progress in mathematics.
