
* 0604326
* Dupin Hypersurfaces and the Kuiper Conjecture
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2006,06/30/2006
* Quo-Shin Chi,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2011
* USD 104,424.00

Let M be a hypersurface in Euclidean space or sphere. A curvature surface of M
is a smooth connected submanifold S such that for each x in S, the tangent space
to S at x is equal to a principal space of the shape operator of M at x. This
generalizes the classical notion of a line of curvature on a surface in the
Euclidean 3-space. The hypersurface is said to be Dupin if along each curvature
surface, the corresponding principal curvature is constant. The hypersurface is
called proper Dupin if it is Dupin and the number g of distinct principal
curvatures is constant on M. An important class of compact proper Dupin
hypersurfaces consists of isoparametric hypersurfaces, which are compact
hypersurfaces whose principal curvatures remain constant everywhere. It is known
that g=1, 2, 3, 4, or 6 for a compact proper Dupin hypersurface, where the first
three cases have been well understood; they are Lie equivalent to, i.e., are
transforms of, isoparametric hypersurfaces via Mobius maps and parallel
transforms. The conclusion is not true when g=4, or 6. However, in these two
cases one can form the cross ratio of any four principal curvatures. It has been
conjectured that a compact proper Dupin hypersurface is Lie equivalent to an
isoparametric hypersurface if the cross ratio of any four principal curvatures
is constant. We have settled the case for g=4 when the multiplicities of the
principal curvatures are of the form (m,m,1,1). (In general, they are of the
form (m,m,n,n).) We propose to settle the entire conjecture, for g=4, by
investigating an intriguing link between Dupin hypersurfaces and the invariant
theory of homogeneous polynomials. In the resolution of the aforementioned
conjecture for multiplicities (m,m,1,1), the analyticity, or more generally,
algebraicity, of a compact proper Dupin hypersurface that we established via
real algebraic geometry, palys a crucial role, in that one can reduce the global
study to a local one. A compact proper Dupin hypersurface is known to be a taut
hypersurface, which is essentially one for which all Morse distance functions
have the same number of critical points of index k as the k-th Betti number
(with Z_2 coefficients). The Kuiper conjecture states that a compact taut
hypersurface is algebraic. We have established the conjecture when the nowhere
dense wild set of the manifold, where the principal curvatures change
multiplicities, is controllable in an appropriate sense. We propose to settle
the Kuiper conjecture by establishing this controllability for all compact taut
hypersurfaces. Morse theory applied to studying the topology of a curvature
surface through a point in the wild set to establish a generic foliation seems
to hold the key.

A type of Hamiltonian systems naturally arises in gas dynamics, hydrodynamics,
chemical kinetics, Whitham averaging procedure, etc., is the hydrodynamic type.
Remarkably, the subtype of the weakly nonlinear Hamiltonian systems of
hydrodynamic type is in one-to-one correspondence with the class of Dupin
hypersurfaces, which need not be compact in general. It turns out that the
classification of weakly nonlinear Hamiltonian systems rests exactly on the
irreducibility condition, satisfied by a compact proper Dupin hypersurface,
which is important in our proposal. The analyticity, or more generally,
algebraicity, of a proper Dupin hypersurface, compact or not, joins hand in hand
with the irreducibility condition to reduce the classification to a local
problem of investigating some local invariants of homogeneous polynomials. The
outcome of our proposal would contribute significantly to the understanding of
the system of hydrodynamic type in various applications.


