
* 0604164
* Research on Lagrangian Mean Curvature Flow and Yamabe Invariants
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2006,05/16/2006
* Andre Neves,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 111,357.00

The aim of this project is to study geometric flows and the relationship between
curvature and topology. Regarding geometric flows, the principal investigator
plans to study higher codimension mean curvature flow, which is the gradient
flow for the area functional. More precisely, we plan to study mean curvature
flow deformation of Lagrangian submanifolds. In his thesis, the principal
investigator showed that finite time singularities are unavoidable, i.e., they
occur in many cases where experts were hoping they would not occur, and then he
proved the optimal result about the infinitesimal behavior of singularities. We
plan to investigate other settings on which we can understand singularities and
also to understand the size of the singular set at the time of the first
singularity. This last question is very challenging and a satisfactory answer
would be a breakthrough in the field. Regarding the relationship between
curvature and topology we plane to investigate which constant scalar curvature
metrics does a 3-manifold admit. More specifically, we intent to extend the
investigator's previous work and hope to unveil a large class of manifolds $L$
for which $M$ and $M\#L$ have the same ``type'' of constant positive scalar
curvature metrics.

The underlying philosophy of many problems in geometric analysis is to given a
geometric object being able to find another geometric object carrying the same
type of information but having better properties. For instance, if one is
studying the paths that go from A to B, the best possible path would be the one
with shortest lenght. Both problems addressed in this research project obey this
guiding principle. In the first one we try to use a heat -equation flow method
to deform certain kinds of Lagrangian submanifolds into those that are still
Lagrangian but have the least area possible. This is expected to have very nice
applications in mathematical physics (more precisely in the SYZ conjecture). In
the second problem we try to understand which geometric information does a
constant scalar curvature metric carry. It is known that for surfaces these
metrics determine its topological type. For 3-manifolds it is know that constant
Ricci curvature determines the manifold. It is an important open problem to
understand, for 3-dimensional manifolds, the information that can be extracted
from constant scalar curvature metrics.


