
* 0604759
* Topics in Differential Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/2006,06/19/2006
* Jon Wolfson,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2010
* USD 196,999.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 0604759 Principal Investigator: Jon Wolfson

The project will investigate the question of the existence minimal lagrangian
submanifolds in Kaehler-Einstein manifolds and special lagrangian submanifolds
in Calabi-Yau manifolds using variational and deformation techniques and using
mean curvature flow. The ``Lagrangian Hodge Conjecture'' states that given an
integral lagrangian homology class in a Calabi-Yau manifold there is a special
lagrangian cycle that represents this class. This conjecture is now known to be
false in a Calabi-Yau surface (a K3 surface). The failure of the conjecture is
closely related to the existence of singularities (other than branch points) on
minimizing lagrangians. This project aims to answer a related conjecture, the
``Deformation Lagrangian Hodge Conjecture'': Given a one-parameter family of
Calabi-Yau metrics whose associated Kaehler forms have fixed cohomology class
and given a lagrangian homology class, suppose that the initial metric in the
family admits a special lagrangian cycle that represents the lagrangian homology
class. Then, we conjecture, that the metrics in the one-parameter family
sufficient close to the initial metric also admit special lagrangian cycles that
represents this class. This conjecture has been established in the two dimension
case (the case of special lagrangian surfaces in K3 surfaces) and in the case
that the initial special lagrangian is an immersion. It is known that the mean
curvature flow of a smooth lagrangian submanifold preserves the lagrangian
condition if the ambient manifold is Kaehler-Einstein. The project intends to
investigate various questions about the behavior of lagrangians under this flow,
in particular, to study examples that can be used either to give counter-
examples to the Thomas-Yau conjecture or show that any such counter-example must
be global.

Variational problems with geometric constraints, deformation problems and mean
curvature flow in codimension greater than one are on the frontier of
mathematical analysis. These problems are natural in geometry but they are also
important in many different applied problems. For example, in material science a
model problem asks to find a minimizer of ``kinetic energy'' among area
preserving maps between disks and to find the optimal smoothness of the
minimizer. Parts of this project are closely related to this kind of existence
and regularity question and therefore to developing techniques at the
foundations of the theory of non-linear elasticity. In string theory, a branch
of theoretical physics, well known work conjectures the existence of a certain
class of volume minimizing three dimensional surfaces called special lagrangian
submanifolds. This project is a direct attempt to resolve this conjecture. Mean
curvature flow in various codimensions models many different physical phenomena,
including, for example, flame propagation. This project attempts to exploit the
``lagrangian'' constraint to get an understanding of mean curvature flow in
higher codimensions. The techniques investigated in this project hold the
promise of enhancing the interaction between geometry and various fields of
applied mathematics and engineering and in bringing new results and techniques
into these fields.
