
* 0605639
* Geometric Lessons from String Theory: Applications in Calabi-Yau and tt^* Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2006,07/13/2006
* Katrin Wendland,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 0.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0605639 Principal Investigator: Katrin A. Wendland

It has become a successful practice in mathematics to take advantage of lessons
learnt from physics. In this proposal, three such lessons are singled out, which
should be of interest in their own right but also contribute to the proposer's
long term research aims, a complete understanding of conformal field theories
(CFTs) on K3 surfaces and beyond. The first part of the project is devoted to
classically unknown properties of elliptically fibered Calabi-Yau 3-folds,
arising from the conjectured heterotic-type IIA string-string duality. We will
combine an algebraic geometric and an index theoretic approach, which is novel.
A new index theorem and novel insights into the mathematics of the duality are
aimed for. A recent conjecture of John McKay is also tested, relating Dynkin
data to sporadic groups. The second part of the project deals with so-called
TERP structures, which underlie the geometry of moduli spaces of supersymmetric
quantum field theories. Here, D-branes and their stability conditions shall be
studied using techniques from geometric analysis and integrable systems rather
than the standard approaches. CFTs on K3 surfaces are studied in the third part
of the project, where for a powerful new family of examples various techniques
for the study of boundary CFTs and vertex operator algebras shall be tested. A
generalization of previously obtained results about CFTs on K3 surfaces to
certain Borcea-Voisin 3-folds is also planned. This research will underpin and
generalize the PI's previous results, confirming and extending an applicable
dictionary between geometry and CFT.

String theory is as yet the most promising candidate for a physical model of the
real world. It describes particles and forces of nature using one-dimensional
extended objects, the strings, whose behavior naturally depends on the ambient
geometry. Vice versa, one can view these strings as testing the ambient
geometry, whose properties can be read off from the behavior of the strings.
This bi-directionality is crucial, since string theory on the other hand uses
the language of quantum field theory which in many ways is richer than classical
geometry. Hence string theory provides a natural bridge between two fundamental,
seemingly unrelated concepts: quantum field theory and geometry. The proposed
research aims to make use of this bridge. In particular, it is proposed to use
classically unknown predictions coming from string theory to gain a deeper
understanding of various geometric structures, including particular Calabi-Yau
3-folds and so-called tt* geometry in general.
