
* 0605097
* Holomorphic Curves and Two-Dimensional Gauge Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2006,07/16/2012
* Christopher Woodward,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2012
* USD 326,954.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0605097 Principal Investigator: Christopher Woodward

The PI will carry out research projects on the interplay of holomorphic curves
and two-dimensional gauge theory. With K. Wehrheim and S. Mau the PI will study
the role of Lagrangian correspondences in Floer-Fukaya theory, and in particular
prove that the composition of functors associated to Lagrangian correspondences
is the functor associated to the composition. He will also develop the mirror
analogue of Horja's exact triangle. He will apply these results to the
construction of new invariants of three and four-manifolds with boundary,
possibly containing tangles. With C. Teleman he will prove the Newstead-Ramanan
conjectures on Chern classes of the moduli space of bundles on a curve and
investigate K-theoretic Gromov-Witten invariants of quotient stacks. With E.
Gonzalez he will investigate Gromov-Witten invariants for symplectic manifolds
with Hamiltonian group actions, generalizing the topological limit of two-
dimensional Yang-Mills theory. He will run several research experiences for
undergraduates, and improve the department's undergraduate seminar program.

These projects will advance the understanding of symplectic geometry, which is
the mathematical language for classical mechanics, and the relationship between
category theory, representation theory, and quantum physics. The research is
also expected to lead to advances in the theory of finite- and infinite-
dimensional Lie groups, which represent symmetries in many areas of science.
