
* 0606603
* Convexity and Applications
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2006,05/05/2008
* Elisabeth Werner,OH,Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2009
* USD 135,852.00

The PI's research is in classical convexity theory and convex geometric
analysis. A primary goal is to get a better understanding of the structure of
convex bodies. To do so she uses techniques from different areas of mathematics:
analysis, differential geometry, convexity theory, probability theory. She
investigates isoperimetric inequalities and affine isoperimetric inequalities.
These provide powerful tools in characterizing and classifying convex sets.
Through her investigation of the affine surface area -originally a concept of
affine differential geometry and occurring in the affine isoperimetric
inequality- she was lately led to an extensive study of questions of
approximation of convex bodies by polytopes . The affine surface area appears
naturally in this context as it is related to the boundary structure of a convex
body. The PI has investigated and still is investigating different aspects of
approximation of convex bodies by polytopes. In one paper, for instance, she
-together with her collaborator- proved the surprising result that random
approximation by polytopes (choosing the vertices of the approximating polytope
randomly on the boundary of the body) is as good as best approximation. Besides
convexity tools, probabilistic tools, like concentration of measure, have proved
to be very efficient in convexity. The PI continues her investigation of such
probabilistic results for advancing her research in structural results in
convexity and its applications to local Banach space theory and quantum
information theory.

Past experience has led the PI to believe that purely theoretical concepts are
also useful in applications. She has experienced that the methods and results
from these areas find applications in other fields of mathematics and in applied
areas: Geometric tomography, a tool having its origins in classical convexity
theory, gives a method to recover convex shapes from its sections or
projections. This is used in computer vision and image analysis, in biology and
medicine where convex shapes (organs) occur naturally. Geometric algorithms find
applications in computer science. To be more explicit, a mathematical
description of a scientific or engineering question often requires lots of
independent numbers, leading to a geometric space of high dimension. For
example, if you want to specify the location of one gas molecule in a room then
you need to report the front/back, side-to-side, and up/down locations of the
molecule, using three numbers. The direction and speed of the molecule's motion
takes another three numbers, and so to describe enough of the molecule's current
state to allow us to predict its future motion from position and velocity we
would need six separate numbers in all. If you want to track 100 distinct
molecules of the air in the room then you will need 600 independent numerical
coordinates to collect all of the relevant measurements. As these dimensions
increase then the difficulty of sampling and computation go up rapidly, a
phenomenon scientists and mathematicians sometimes call "the curse of
dimensionality." However, there are also patterns that emerge as dimension
increases, and this grant will study some of these patterns that are recent
discoveries.
