
* 0606721
* Analytic Torsion on Calabi-Yau Moduli
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2006,07/14/2006
* Hao Fang,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,999.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0606721 Principal Investigator: Hao Fang

The principal investigator proposes to study analytic torsion on the Calabi-Yau
manifolds. Inspired by Beshadsky-Coccoti-Ooguri-Vafa, the principal investigator
, joint with Lu and Yoshikawa, has constructed a new holomorphic invariant of
Calabi-Yau manifolds, which can be computed the invariant for one dimensional
moduli spaces. In general, the principal investigator suggests an approach to
analysis the asymptotic behavior of the new invariant, by using the local index
theory techniques. This project should give insight on better understanding of
the torsion invariants and the Calabi-Yau moduli. The proposed study can be
viewed as an attempt to study problems in algebraic geometry using methods of
differential geometry. By studying local geometry analytically near the
singularities, the principal investigator also hopes to give new examples of the
explicitly computable torsion invariants and reveal relations of torsion
invariants to number theory.

This project also will have broader impact. Torsion invariants have come from
topology and high energy physics theories. The proposed study will shed new
light on understanding Mirror Symmetry, which is one of the central problems in
current theoretical physics. Understanding this theory will give mathematical
foundation of the String Theory, which is a potential unified theory for high
energy physics long sought after since Einstein's time. For example, the
proposed research might lead to better understanding of (the number and the
shape) of the universe. Interaction with fellow mathematicians and physicists is
expected and will be necessary for the success of this research project. The
principal investigator will participate the integrated research and education
activities that will promote the education level of the nation.
