
* 0606684
* Southeast Geometry Conference, 2006-2008
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 04/15/2006,09/29/2009
* Thomas Ivey,SC,College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2010
* USD 18,600.00

The Southeast Geometry Conference (SEGC) is an annual event, now in its
seventeenth year, that brings together mathematicians working in geometry (and
related areas) at institutions in the southeastern United States. In recent
years, talks at the conference have covered a wide range of subjects, such as
computational geometry, geometric optimization, integral geometry, the geometry
of differential equations, and geometrical methods in mathematical physics. By
combining geometers with researchers who apply geometric techniques to other
areas of mathematics, the SEGC helps members of each group recognize unexpected
connections and new directions for future research. The conference also plays an
important role in bringing together researchers in the Southeast with new and
existing collaborators from other parts of the U.S.

The Southeast Geometry Conference is the only regular multi-day conference
devoted to geometry in this region. Since the year 2000, the site of the
conference has rotated among the University of Georgia, the University of South
Carolina, and the College of Charleston, and has involved speakers and
participants from a broad spectrum of types of institutions (public and private
research universities, prominent regional universities, and liberal arts
colleges). Moreover, the organizers have actively sought to involve young
researchers and graduate students in the conference. In particular, the SEGC
provides a rare venue for new and recent PhD recipients to give full-length
presentations (typically, 45-50 minutes in length) of their latest results. In
recent years, the SEGC has also included an evening poster session for graduate
students to present their dissertation research. More information can be found
on the conference web site: http://math.cofc.edu/SEGC/default.html
