
* 0606869
* Manifolds with Group Actions and their Quotients
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2006,07/10/2006
* Rebecca Goldin,VA,George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 98,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0606869 Principal Investigator: Rebecca Goldin

Orbifolds are among the simplest type of singular spaces. They arise in
symplectic geometry as reductions, in algebraic geometry (where they are called
Deligne-Mumford stacks) as certain moduli spaces, and in topology as quotient
spaces. Algebraic invariants of these spaces, such as stringy Betti numbers,
twisted Hodge numbers, and Chen-Ruan cohomology (also called orbifold
cohomology) have recently gained interest because they are subtle enough to see
the singularities, and in some cases describe the cohomology of a (crepant)
resolution of singularities. This grant will explore new methods to compute the
Chen-Ruan cohomology of an orbifold, following work done by the PI and coauthors
in the case that the orbifold is a global quotient by a compact abelian Lie
group. These methods should produce a new combinatorial fomula for the Chen-Ruan
cohomology of a hypertoric variety (a hyperkahler reduction of quaternionic
n-space by a compact torus), a formula for the K-theory of global abelian
quotients, and the Chen-Ruan cohomology of non-abelian (Lie group) quotients. We
hope to use these methods to discount or prove certain conjectures about or
bifolds and crepant resolutions. In a separate undertaking, the PI is pursuing a
general combinatorial formula for questions about the equivariant cohomology of
manifolds with circle actions and isolated fixed points. We have found a
topological formula for the restriction of certain canonical classes to any
other fixed point, which has led to a kind of classification in 6-dimensions. In
higher dimensions, we have found a "positive" restriction formula in the case
that the manifold is Kahler and carries an invariant Palais-Smale metric (or has
other rather rigid structure, such as being a GKM space). This work should lead
to combinatorial formulas for the product structure in the equivariant
cohomology, a topic of broad interest because it applies to flag manifolds and
toric varieties, among other varieties. In a third project, we propose to
investigate different formulae for the structure constants in Schubert calculus
using methods developed on the calculus of Bott-Samelson manifolds. This should
also generalize to fixed-point restriction formulas in the case of a symmetric
group (the fixed points of an involution on G) acting on G/B.

This research has roots in classical mechanics. Phase space, which consists of
the position and momentum of a particle, is an example of a symplectic space,
with an action by the symmetry group, also called a Hamiltonian action. Symmetry
arises from the fact that the physics is the same for all observers. By
"collapsing" a high-dimensional symplectic space by the symmetry, we can get a
smaller space that is sometimes easier to work with. In a broad sense, this
grant is concerned with describing these spaces with group actions, and their
quotients. It will have impact on certain questions in physics that have arisen
in string theory, as well as contribute to the discussion of how "rigid" our
physical universe is by virtue of symmetry.


