
* 0608639
* Geometry and Mathematical Physics: Conference in Madrid, Spain, - Sept. 4-Sept.9, 2006
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2006,06/16/2006
* Yat Sun Poon,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2007
* USD 25,000.00

This project co-sponsors a conference titled "A Geometry Conference in Honor of
Nigel Hitchin". This conference will take place from September 4, 2006 to
September 9, 2006 in Madrid, Spain. It is a Satellite Conference of the
International Congress of Mathematicians 2006. Its scientific focus is concerned
with the current and future development of differential and algebraic geometry
arising from mathematical physics. Key topics for concerns are symplectic
geometry, Kahler geometry, Einstein geometry, spinor and twistor geometry,
generalized Kahler geometry, geometry and topology of gerbes, geometry of
special holonomy, integrable systems, and the associated moduli problems in
respective areas. The key impetus from physics to this conference comes from
gravitational theory, string theory and mirror symmetry.

Through the proposed conference, leading practitioners in all these areas with
different approaches will present most recent development, provide conference
participants with an overall view of a cluster of issues and ideas. The
conference will explore future development. This conference will sustain the
interaction between geometry and mathematical physics, and bridge practitioners
at all career levels to the frontier of this cluster of research topics, and
hence sustain the workforce base in this area of mathematics and mathematical
physics. The conference will publish a proceeding. More information can be found
on the conference web site http://www.mat.csic.es/webpages/conf/hitchin2006/
