
* 0608643
* Measure on the Ideal Boundary of a Nonpositively Curved Space: Random Walks and Rigidity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2006,05/10/2006
* Christopher Connell,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2011
* USD 123,571.00

The combination of differential geometric and dynamical methods has been very
successful in the study of negatively curved manifolds and metric spaces. For
instance, delicate information about geodesics and geometry at different scales
in these spaces can be gleaned from the behavior of random walks on discrete
models and the study of certain ergodic measures on their geometric boundaries.
For random walks on nonamenable groups, a basic question has been to understand
the relationship of its Poisson boundary to other natural geometric boundaries.
Starting with the work of Furstenberg, and continuing with the work of many
others, much progress has been made in understanding when Poisson boundary
measures for a random walks on important classes of nonpositively curved groups
can be supported on their geodesic boundary. However, much less is known about
what measures can arise this way. The first part of the proposed research seeks
to show that many of the classes of ergodic measures arising from geometric
constructions on the ideal boundary are represented by Poisson boundaries. We
are also interested in groups which are not nonpositively curved, yet share some
common features such as the mapping class groups or the diffeomorphism group of
a circle. This represents a natural outgrowth of the PI's work with R. Muchnik.
The second proposed direction of study examines the barycenter method as a tool
for understanding manifolds admitting nontrivial maps to nonpositively curved
manifolds. This is a differential geometric application of the study of boundary
measures. By relating the volume and large scale geometry of a manifold, we wish
to use these methods to realize further extensions of Mostow rigidity.



A number of remarkable developments in both mathematics and the physical
sciences have revealed how random processes in a given system often reflect
certain structural features of that system. For example, an ant randomly
stepping one unit north, south, east or west in the Euclidean plane will
eventually return to its starting point with probabilistic certainty. However,
this no longer holds when one allows an additional degree of freedom of
movement, say up and down in the third dimension. Hence, the recurrence property
of this "random walk" detects the dimension of the ambient space. We propose to
study the flexibility of such connections between the geometry of the underlying
space and certain random processes. We especially are interested in
understanding when generalized random walks on important families of spaces can
produce a prescribed set of measurements. From another point of view, these
auxiliary measurements themselves capture other intrinsic aspects of these
spaces, and can sometimes indicate "rigidity" of the space. This refers to the
phenomenon whereby a weak equivalence between spaces implies a strong
equivalence. We hope to discover new ways in which rigidity arises.


