
* 0703213
* Research in Classical Minimal Surface Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2007,06/20/2007
* William Meeks,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 153,165.00

Minimal surfaces play an important role as a tool in the study of three-
dimensional topology and Riemannian geometry. The research in this proposal
concerns global properties of embedded minimal surfaces and possible
applications of these results to basic research in three-dimensional topology
and geometry. The researcher will study the geometry, asymptotic behavior,
conformal structure and topology of properly embedded minimal surfaces in three-
dimensional Euclidean space. One of the main goals of the proposal is to
classify all of the properly embedded minimal surfaces which can be parametrized
by domains in the Euclidean plane and to describe the asymptotic geometry of all
finite genus examples. Related theoretical techniques concerning compactness,
regularity and convergence of minimal surfaces of locally bounded genus will be
investigated as well. As an outgrowth of his recent joint manuscript with
Charles Froman on the topological classification for minimal surfaces, the
researcher proposes to prove that Bryant surfaces in hyperbolic three-space are
unknotted.

Classical minimal surface theory has its roots in 18-th and 19-th century
mathematics. Minimal surfaces are the first important examples of what is called
the calculus of variations, first described by Euler around 1735. Physically
minimal surfaces can be modeled locally as soap films on wires or by surfaces of
least-area relative to their boundaries. Minimal surfaces represent stationary
fluid interfaces, and so their shapes arise in many physical problems. The work
in this proposal will help classify the possible physical shapes which might
occur as such interfaces. Many of the known examples of minimal surfaces are
observed physically, and so it is of interest to have a rigorous theorem which
predicts the shapes which can occur. In part because of important connections
with other areas of mathematics and because it is possible to make beautiful
computer graphics pictures of classical examples, minimal surfaces continue to
be one of the principal topics for popular science articles and public science
exhibits. Thus, indirerctly, the exciting research problems outlined in this
proposal help bring many young scientists and mathematicians to the froniters of
research.




