
* 0705263
* Analytic and Algebraic Aspects of Quantum Field Theories on Alegraic Curves
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2007,03/23/2009
* Leon Takhtajan,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2011
* USD 296,000.00

The main objective of the proposal is to develop methods of quantum field theory
on algebraic curves, with applications to the study of complex-analytic and
algebraic properties of moduli spaces --- the problems which are formulated
using classical mathematics. The goals of the complex-analytic part of the
project are the following: 1) derivation of the higher genus analog of
Kronecker's second limit formula; 2) study of a new Kaehler metric on moduli
spaces of punctured Riemann surfaces (so-called Takhtajan-Zograf metric), and
Chern forms on moduli spaces of parabolic vector bundles; 3) application of the
Weil-Petersson geometry of the universal Teichmueller space for the study of the
univalent functions in the unit disk; 4) new relation between solution of the
Riemann-Hilbert problem and the Wess-Zumino-Witten theory; 5) development of
non-perturbative methods in geometric approach to quantum Liouville theory. This
will result in major advances in the areas of mathematical physics related to
the complex geometry of moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces and vector bundles,
will give a remarkable product formula for Riemann theta-function in higher
genus, will provide a new understanding of the classical Riemann-Hilbert
problem, and will introduce new infinite-dimensional methods in the theory of
the univalent functions.

The immediate and long term goals of the algebraic side are the following: 1)
unification of classical theory of abelian differentials on Riemann surfaces
with the adelic approach of C.~Chevalley and A.~Weil --- formulation of
``differential and integral calculus'' on algebraic curves over algebraically
closed ground field, to be used for constructing quantum field theories on
algebraic curves and for reciprocity laws; 2) development of ``algebraic
harmonic analysis'' on adeles when the corresponding residue class field is not
a finite field. This will result in a dramatic advance of our understanding of
``calculus'' on algebraic curves with applications that will possibly include
fields of algebraic numbers.

The last thirty years have been characterized by remarkable interaction between
mathematics and physics, which let to dramatic discoveries in various
mathematics disciplines, bringing together the areas that were thought to be
apart. In many cases application of methods of quantum fields and strings has
been very successful, once again justifying Riemann's old idea of ``probing''
mathematical objects with physical theories and translating the physical
``output'' back into the realm of mathematics. When probing mathematical objects
by quantum field theory, the mathematical output is encoded in partition
function and correlation functions of quantum fields, defined by Feynman path
integral, usually given in terms of perturbation expansion, and expressed
through the critical value of the classical action and so-called ``quantum
corrections''. Symmetries of the theory manifest themselves in Ward identities
--- fundamental relations between partition function and correlation functions,
which in many cases produce new and unexpected mathematical results. Proper
understanding and exploitation of these symmetries is in the heart of today's
applications of quantum physics to different mathematical disciplines. The
realization of the main goals of the proposal will significantly contribute to
the fundamental interface between mathematics and physics. This applies to the
complex-analytic part as well as to the algebraic part; the fundamental
properties of the latter are discrete, to study them at a microscopic scale
using quantum theory. In particular, many classical mathematical results about
fields of algebraic functions and algebraic numbers, known as reciprocity laws,
can be interpreted as conservation laws (like conservation of energy) in quantum
theory. The main goal of the algebraic part of the project is to develop this
analogy further by formulating an approach based on the algebraic version of a
Green's function, which is a fundamental object of classical analysis and
mathematical physics, and is extensively used in quantum field theory.


