
* 0705467
* Cycles, Characters and Pluripotential Theory in Calibrated Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2007,03/23/2009
* H. Blaine Lawson,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2011
* USD 439,000.00

Part I

This project is concerned with the study of cycles and their boundaries, forms,
and generalized plurisubharmonic functions. The proposal has several
interrelated parts. The first concerns the groups of algebraic cycles and
cocycles on a projective variety X. The aim is to relate these groups to the
global structure of X. The investigator has, with others, established a theory
of homology type for algebraic varieties based on the homotopy groups of cycles
spaces. This theory will be used to study concrete questions about algebraic
spaces. Implications for real algebraic geometry will be explored. Striking
connections to universal constructions in topology which emerged in prior
research will also be investigated. The second part of the proposal concerns
cycles which bound holomorphic chains in projective manifolds. In particular,
characterizations in terms of projective linking numbers and quasi-
plurisubharmonic functions will be sought. This will entail a deep analysis of
the structure of projective hulls, a concept analogous to polynomial hulls,
which has been introduced by the investigator and is ofindependent interest.
Projective hulls are related to approximation theory, pluripotential theory, and
the spectrum of Banach graded algebras. The third topic, a major part of the
proposal, concerns the broad development of a pluripotential theory in
calibrated and other geometries. The notions of plurisubharmonic function,
pseudo-convex domain, capacity, and solutions to the Dirichlet problem for
generalized Monge-Amp\`ere-type equations will be studied in a very general
setting. This project, already underway, should have an impact in calibrated
geometry, which in turn plays an important role in M-theory in modern physics.
There should also be applications to symplectic geometry and to p-convexity in
riemannian geometry. The forth part of the proposal concerns sparks and spark
complexes. These objects mediate betweeen cycles and smooth data, and give a
concrete presentation of differential characters and their generalizations. In
the complex category this involves an analytic study of Deligne cohomology and
relates to arithmetic Chow groups. It yields invariants for bundles and
foliations, and retrieves the classical Abel-Jacobi mappings. This project will
also be concerned with student development, including an undergraduate
educational effort aimed at fostering mathematical independence and developing
interactive environments.

Part II

A concept of central importance in geometry is that of a ``cycle''. In
algebraic geometry a cycle corresponds to the simultaneous solution of a system
of polynomial equations. In differential geometry they arise in many ways: as
the large scale solutions of certain differential equations, and as the level
sets and singularity sets of differentiable mappings. Curves and surfaces in
space are simple examples. Cycles with a particular geometry also play a
fundamental role in modern physical theories

This proposal is concerned with the study of cycles across this broad spectrum.
In the algebraic setting, cycles have been related to fundamental large-scale
geometry of their surrounding space. This discovery has revealed surprizing and
important relationships between spaces of algebraic cycles and fundamental
constructions in algebraic topology and has led to new insights in both fields.
This work will be continued.

Another area of investigation concerns cycles which form the boundary of subsets
with special geometric structure. They represent non-linear versions of
classical boundary value problems in analysis. Such questions arise in many
contexts. The proposer has formulated conjectures relating important classes of
such cycles to questions in approximation theory and Banach algebras. Successful
resolution will establish a series of new results in complex geometry and should
lead to significant new insights in several other fields of mathematics.

A third part of the proposal aims at extending classical pluripotential theory
to very general geometric settings. These include calibrated geometries,
symplectic and Lagrangian geometries, and much more.An uncanny amount of the
classical theory has already been shown to hold in this general context.
Solutions to the Dirichlet problem for associated Monge-Ampere type equations
will be sought in this setting. The study is, in a certain strict sense, dual to
the study of the special cycles appearing in these geometries. It should apply
to Special Lagrangian cycles in Calabi-Yau manifolds, and associative and Cayley
cycles in G(2) and Spin(7) spaces. These latter subjects relate to gauge field
theory and gravity in Physics

A forth domain of investigation concerns a mathematical apparatus developed by
the proposer and R. Harvey to detect subtle relationships between cycles and the
global structure of the space they live in. This apparatus encompasses some of
the most effective tools historically developed for this purpose, and it is much
more general. Further development of this theory and its applications will be
pursued. This project will also be concerned with graduate student development.
Students will be part of the research team. There will also be an undergraduate
educational effort aimed at fostering mathematical independence and developing
interactive environments.


