
* 0706859
* Isoperimetric Inequalities
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2007,05/19/2009
* Erwin Lutwak,NY,Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2011
* USD 430,200.00

The Brunn-Minkowski theory, often called the theory of mixed volumes, is the
very core of convex geometric analysis. Over the years numerous applications to
---or connections with---other fields of mathematics, science, and engineering
have been discovered, including partial differential equations, algebraic
geometry, statistics, number theory, Minkowski and Finsler geometry, stereology,
information theory. The goal of this proposal is the development of extensions
and duals of the classical Brunn-Minkowski theory. A special focus is the
development of affine isoperimetric inequalities. There have been numerous
applications of affine inequalities in PDEs, Banach space geometry, geometric
tomography, and even robot vision. Another special focus will be the development
of the analytic counterparts of affine isoperimetric inequalities. New methods
developed by the PIs will be used to attempt to make progress on a number of
long-conjectured affine isoperimetric inequalities. Another main focus of the
proposal concerns a prescribed curvature problem, known as the Lp Minkowski
problem, that arises naturally within the extended Brunn-Minkowski theory. Work
of the PIs indicates that there are interesting potential connections between
information theory and convex geometric analysis. These connections will be
exploited with the aim of establishing new geometric results inspired by their
information theory counterparts.

The classical Brunn-Minkowski theory has provided powerful tools needed to solve
a variety of basic inverse problems where the only "data" available involves
information regarding the projections of convex bodies onto lower-dimensional
subspaces (such as lines and planes). However, the tools of the classical Brunn-
Minkowski theory have been of little value in dealing with the dual of these
questions, where "projections onto subspaces" are replaced by "intersections
with subspaces". The PIs are continuing efforts to develop a dual Brunn-
Minkowski theory. This dual theory has already led to the solution of a
longstanding problem where the known information involved the intersections of
the unknown bodies with planes. Such "inverse problems" are basic in not only
mathematics but also science and engineering.


