
* 0706777
* Holomorphic Curves and Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2007,06/04/2007
* Lenhard Ng,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 128,897.00

This project focuses on the interplay between low-dimensional topology and knot
theory on one side, and symplectic and contact geometry on the other. It has
recently been demonstrated that counting holomorphic curves in symplectic
manifolds is a powerful tool in the topology of three- and four-manifolds. In
particular, the Symplectic Field Theory associated to cotangent bundles shows
great promise in yielding information about smooth structures on low-dimensional
manifolds. This project proposes to find combinatorial and computationally
accessible formulations for Symplectic Field Theory in this circumstance, with
applications to areas such as knot theory and the (still unsolved) smooth four-
dimensional Poincare conjecture. The project will also investigate the
relationship between these symplectic-flavored smooth invariants and other
recently developed geometric invariants such as Heegaard Floer theory and string
topology. A closely related project will formulate Symplectic Field Theory
combinatorially for Legendrian submanifolds, addressing a significant open
problem in contact geometry.

This proposal studies problems in topology such as the conjectured existence of
an "exotic" smooth structure on four-dimensional space (the "smooth four-
dimensional Poincare conjecture"). Although the problems are classical, the
proposed approach using Symplectic Field Theory is quite new. It involves
recently developed techniques from the interrelated fields of symplectic
geometry, algebraic geometry, and string theory. Such techniques have been
spectacularly successful in the last decade and show great promise in topology
for understanding the classification of spaces in three and four dimensions, as
well as the classification of knots. This will likely have interesting
applications to related aspects of physics such as string theory and mirror
symmetry.
