
* 0706837
* Determinants of Elliptic Operators in Geometry, Number Theory, and Physics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2007,07/24/2007
* Maxim Braverman,MA,Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2011
* USD 110,993.00

In this project we continue to study the complex valued refinement of the Ray-
Singer analytic torsion introduced in our joint paper with T. Kappeler. This
study will lead to new properties of both the Ray-Singer torsion and the eta-
invariant. In particular, we suggest a refined version of the Bismut-Lott higher
analytic torsion which contains more information and is easier to study than the
original higher torsion. We also suggest a version of the refined analytic
torsion for complex Calabi-Yau manifolds. This will lead to applications in
number theory. In particular, to a multi-dimensional generalization of the
Dedekind eta-function. We also consider a new regularization procedure for
definition of the trace and the determinant of certain class of pseudo-
differential operators on odd-dimensional manifolds. This procedure allows to
avoid many anomalies coursed by usual zeta-function regularization. It also
turns out to be the most adequate for description of non-linear sigma-models of
superconductivity. In a joint project with A. Abanov we suggest to use this
regularization to get a first mathematically rigorous computation of the Berry
phase in some of these models.

We propose a new geometric invariant of compact manifolds which combines two
classical invariants - the Ray-Singer torsion and the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer eta-
invariant. Our construction allows to study both invariants simultaneously and
leads to discovery of new properties of them. A similar invariant for complex
manifolds leads to new applications in complex geometry and number theory. The
definition of the new invariant is based on the study of determinants of non-
self-adjoint differential operators. We suggest a new construction of such
determinants, which, in some cases, behaves better than the usual one, and which
is more adequate for description of certain models of superconductivity. Using
this construction we suggest a first rigorous approach to these models.
