
* 0707317
* RUI: Problems in Geometric Analysis and General Relativity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2007,06/19/2008
* Justin Corvino,PA,Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2011
* USD 120,776.00

Initial data for the Einstein field equations are specified by solutions to the
Einstein constraint equations. The P.I.'s project fits into a broad program to
understand the space of solutions to the constraint equations, often with
specified asymptotics. The P.I. has developed local deformation and asymptotic
gluing techniques that have proven fruitful, both for understanding the
asymptotic structure of solutions of the constraints, and for performing
localized gluing constructions on solutions to the constraints. For example,
joint work of the P.I. with R. Schoen showed that solutions to the vacuum
constraints which have exactly Kerr asymptotics are dense in the space of
asymptotically flat solutions. Part of the project involves studying the
extension of the asymptotic results to the asymptotically hyperbolic setting,
which would have application to the Positive Mass Theorem in this case
(following recent work of Andersson-Cai-Galloway). Results on both asymptotics
and localized gluing constructions will be extended to the case of gravity
coupled with matter fields. Related aspects of the project include: the study of
small-data solutions of the constraints (relating to, for example, the Penrose
compactification); local deformation properties of the constraints in
conjunction with quasi-local mass minimizers, in the sense of Bartnik; the
existence of horizons and isoperimetric profiles in asymptotically flat spaces;
some problems in Lorentzian comparison geometry.

A more thorough understanding of the space of solutions of the Einstein
constraint equations would lead naturally to a better understanding of the space
of solutions to Einstein's field equations, which are commonly used to model the
large-scale structure of the universe. To understand the dynamics of
gravitational systems, one might construct initial data with desired properties,
like multiple horizons, or specified asymptotic structure, and then use such
data for numerical modeling of the evolution into the resulting space-times.
Natural physical questions often become interesting geometric and analytical
problems involving the relevant partial differential equations and geometric
quantities. A key component of the project is to introduce and attract
undergraduates to this wonderful interplay of physics and geometric analysis,
through course work, independent study and research. Students will undertake
research with the PI during the summer (occurring simultaneously with
Lafayette's REU program, thus, enabling a broader discussion and sharing of
results) and during the year as independent study and honors theses work.
