
* 0707097
* Uniformization, hyperbolicity and symmetric differentials of projective manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2007,06/22/2007
* Bruno De Oliveira,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2011
* USD 112,783.00

This project tackles two important global geometric/analytic properties of
projective complex manifolds and their universal covers. The first problem is
known as the uniformization problem which is concerned with the global
geometric/analytic properties of universal covers of complex manifolds. One of
the main goals is to obtain information on the space of global holomorphic
functions on the universal covers, which is predicted to be very rich by the
Shafarevich conjecture. The PI will also address the natural question which was
posed by S.T.Yau concerning the embeddability of universal covers of projective
manifolds as open subsets of a projective manifold. The second problem that this
proposal will tackle is the existence of symmetric differentials on projective
manifolds and its impact on hyperbolicity properties. The principal investigator
showed previously that there are symmetric differentials on deformations of
smooth hypersurfaces in projective 3-space. This is an important and a far
reaching surprise (recall that the smooth hypersurfaces do not have symmetric
differentials). The PI intends to explore this occurrence to obtain several new
hyperbolicity results for hypersurfaces.

Complex manifolds are natural objects in mathematics and in particular in the
field of complex geometry. They appear in the mathematical models of engineering
and physics. The research program proposed will contribute to a better
understanding of the properties of complex manifolds and the theory of their
functions. Advances in complex geometry will have a significant impact on the
development of the models of physics, such as string theory, describing the
forces that shape our universe. This project will also allow the principal
investigator to organize seminars that will bring experts of the field from
other parts of the country to his institution. This will help foster the
research in complex geometry in the area and it will be essential to the
education of the graduate students at his institution. The principal
investigator hopes to foster an environment of scientific curiosity and
investigation that will have a wide range of applications.


