
* 0710714
* Some geometric variational problems on ramified transportation and intersection homology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2007,06/22/2007
* Qinglan Xia,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2011
* USD 99,676.00

This project concerns geometric variational problems derived from optimal
transportation as well as from the intersection homology theory of singular
varieties. The first part of the project studies optimal ramified (i.e.
branching) transportation, which was modeled after many branching structures in
nature such as trees, river channel networks etc. A central concept there is the
notion of optimal transport path, which mathematically plays the role of a
"geodesic" between two probability measures. Graphically, it has a "tree-shaped"
branching structure similar to fractals. Some of the problems to be addressed
within the project are the following: (1) Optimal ramified transportation in
metric measure spaces; (2) Optimal ramified transportation of higher dimensional
geometric objects (3) Flow of surfaces driven by curvature and transportation
(including both ramified type transportation and Monge-Kantorovich type
transportation), which are modeled after the growth of tree leaves, flowers and
mud-cracking; (4) Dimensional distance between measures and sets. The second
part of the project studies properties of "minimal surfaces" lived in singular
varieties, using geometric measure theory. The PI proved that the intersection
homology theory of MacPherson and Gorsky on singular varieties can be
reformulated in terms of rectifiable currents, and also studied existence as
well as partial regularities of minimizers under suitable modified masses within
each intersection homology group. The PI aims at further investigations of these
minimizers using analytic tools developed in geometric measure theory.

One of the main purposes of mathematics is to explore the beauty and mechanisms
of many naturally generated shapes such as soap films, trees, leaves, and mud
cracking. Many times, optimization process plays a very important role in the
formation of these shapes. For instance, soap films come from minimizing surface
area, while trees adopt branching transport systems to minimize transportation
cost. This project aims at studying geometric shapes whose formation is driven
by some optimization process. The first part of this project studies "tree-type"
branching systems, which are commonly found in living and non-living systems
such as trees, railways, river channel networks, lightning, the circulatory
system, and neural networks. Nature has selected these branching transport
systems partially because they are comparably cost efficient. As a result, to
study mechanisms behind the formation of these branching systems, one may simply
start with the study of optimal transport systems. In the last few years, the PI
and many others have developed geometric variational methods for studying
optimal ramified transportation, and also found its application in modeling the
formation of tree leaves. In this project, the principal investigator is
interested in developing the existing theory in a more general setting, and then
applies it to transport specific geometric objects. Also, by considering
geometric flow of surfaces driven by curvature and transportation, one may use
them to model the formation of leaves, flowers, and some other fractal type
objects. On the other hand, soap films are physical model for minimal surfaces,
which play an important role as a tool in the study of topology, geometry and
physics. The second part of the project aims at studying general properties of
"soap films" lived in singular varieties, which are very nice but usually
contains some singularities, within their intersection homology groups. We will
mainly use geometric measure theory as our analytic tools.


