
* 0712795
* L2 de Rham and Dolbeault cohomology groups on singular complex analytic spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2007,06/29/2007
* Sophia Vassiliadou,DC,Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2012
* USD 105,479.00

The principal investigator will examine problems in the area of several complex
variables that involve differential equations on singular spaces. The spaces of
interest in this proposal are algebraic varieties (zero sets of polynomials) and
complex analytic sets (zero sets of holomorphic functions). In particular, the
principal investigator will address several questions concerning local and
global L2-existence and regularity of solutions to the de Rham and inhomogeneous
Cauchy-Riemann equations on the smooth part of compact complex spaces with
arbitrary singularities. Results of this type are useful to algebraic geometers
working on the interplay between L2-cohomology and intersection cohomology.

Many physical phenomena are modeled by systems of differential equations and
one would like to understand the space of solutions to these equations. In the
early 60's Atiyah and Singer showed that the number of solutions to certain
equations on some spaces can be completely determined by the shape of the space
on which these equations are defined. This result led to the advancement of
quantum field theory and the development of string theory in physics.
Singularities are ubiquitous in nature from the atomic scale (crystals) to the
cosmic scale of the universe (black holes). The proposed research hopes to
contribute in the understanding of how the geometry of singular spaces
influences the existence and behavior of solutions to certain natural equations
on these spaces.
