
* 0739208
* EMSW21-RTG Research Training in Geometry and Topology at Michigan State University
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2008,07/02/2013
* Ronald Fintushel,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2014
* USD 583,870.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 0739208 Principal Investigator: Ronald A. Fintushel, Efstratia
Kalfagianni, Thomas H. Parker, Jon G. Wolfson

The goal of this proposal is the enhancement of the research training
environment in geometry and topology at Michigan State University, building on
our past success. The Geometry/Topology Group at MSU has a long-standing
commitment to excellence in graduate and postdoctoral training: we have produced
some outstanding graduate students, and we have been fortunate to have recruited
and mentored exceptional postdoctoral fellows. Our goal is to use increased
resources to improve: (1) Recruitment at all levels --- undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral. (2) Graduate training, especially in terms of the diversity of
seminars, course offerings, and reducing the time to obtain a Ph.D. (3) The
experience of postdoctoral fellows and their preparation for a tenure-track
position. (4) Undergraduate participation with the Geometry/Topology research
group. (5) Interaction among students and faculty at all levels. (6) The
research environment at all levels with a regular program of seminars and
visitors.

The graduate students and postdoctoral assistants who will be mentored under
this proposal will contribute to research in geometry and topology, using a wide
variety of techniques including gauge theory, geometric analysis,
pseudoholomorphic maps, knot invariants, surgery techniques, 3-manifold
topology, and mapping class groups. Faculty at Michigan State University as well
as former students and postdoctoral assistants have taken part in important
advances in these rapidly progressing areas, and it is expected that future
students and postdoctoral fellows will continue in this direction. To further
stimulate research, the MSU Geometry/Topology Group will initiate new programs
and enhance existing programs for undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows. The key to these programs is the atmosphere of
collaborative learning that has been fostered by the Geometry/Topology Group.

This proposal will address the production of research mathematicians and
teachers of mathematics who are interested in geometry and topology. This
proposal will support 5 new graduate students and 2 new postdoctoral associates
as well as one postdoc and one graduate student who are being supported by our
current RTG grant. Our aim is to create an environment which encourages all
involved to become better teachers, better expositors, and better researchers,
and encourages those entering mathematics to stay in the field.
