
* 0753874
* SM: Conference on Symmetry in Mathematics and Physics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 04/15/2008,03/30/2009
* Donald Babbitt,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2010
* USD 24,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0753874 Principal Investigator: Donald Babbitt, Srinivasa R. Varadhan

The main theme of the conference will be important recent results and
outstanding problems in the fields of representation theory of finite and
infinite dimensional Lie and super-Lie groups, and its applications to quantum
computing, geometry, physics, and differential equations, the different areas
being unified under the over-arching theme of symmetry manifested in geometric
actions of groups and their representations. The speakers will be
internationally recognized researchers in these fields and the audience is
expected to be a mixture of senior researchers in these fields together with
advanced graduate students, postdocs and junior faculty who aspire to make or
already are making important contributions to these fields. There will be travel
funds made available to select participants of the latter group with a special
emphasis on women and underrepresented minorities. It should be pointed out that
four of the twelve speakers are women. The background to the conference consists
of the work on supersymmetry pioneered by the physicists such as Zumino, and
Ferrara (both speakers at the conference), and the work of the mathematicians
Kac, Moody, and others who brought focus to infinite dimensional Lie algebras
and their applications to quantum field theory. In the 1990's the group
theoretic point of view was applied successfully to the theory of meromorphic
differential equations and their moduli. Very recently important new progress
has been made by the development of a supersymmetric Mackey theory and its
applications to super particle classification, by work on differential Galois
group theory of difference equations, and by the work on the foundations of
super-geometry.

Symmetry is one of the most fundamental and useful notions in both mathematics
and theoretical physics. For example it explains the mysteries of the periodic
table of chemical elements such as why hydrogen and oxygen combine to make
water. An example of symmetry is the following; consider an ordinary square made
with wire, rotate it 90 degrees about its center and notice it comes back onto
itself although the molecules of the wire have moved. Do it again, you still get
the same square. When you do it the fourth time, i.e., you rotate it 360 degrees
the molecules of the wire come back to where they started. In mathematical
language this says that &#147;the cyclic group of order 4&#148; is the symmetry
group of the square. It is a wonder that the notion of symmetry and group can be
extended and enriched to explain complicated sub-atomic physical phenomena as
well as solve fundamental problems in mathematics coming from areas such as
cryptography. The symmetries to be considered in this conference are part of
this same story. Of perhaps particular interest is the theoretical notion of
supersymmetry used in the study of sub-particle physics. The founder of this
notion, B. Zumino, will speak at this conference. It is presently a theoretical
hypothesis that many believe to be true but which awaits experimental
verification. It is one of the main goals at the European Center for Nuclear
Research (CERN) in Geneva to use its multi-billion dollar Hadron Collider which
comes on line in 2008 to experimentally establish the supersymmetry hypothesis.
For more information see the conference Website, www.math.ucla.edu/symmetry.
This award is funded jointly by the programs in Geometric Analysis, Probability,
and Algebra, Number Theory, and Combinatorics.
