
* 0755733
* 2008 Yamabe Memorial Symposium, September 2008
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2008,06/25/2008
* Jiaping Wang,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Weiqing Gu
* 06/30/2009
* USD 19,000.00

Abstract

The principal investigators propose to organize the forth Yamabe Memorial
Symposium, with an emphasis on geometry and analysis, at the School of
Mathematics of the University of Minnesota from Friday to Sunday, September
26-28, 2008. The list of speakers includes Simon Brendle, Alice Chang, Jean-
Pierre Demailly, Gerhard Huisken, Leon Simon, Yum-Tong Siu, Neil Trudinger and
Burkhard Wilking.

Professor Hidehiko Yamabe (1923--1960) was an active and highly collaborative
mathematician in the School of Mathematics of the University of Minnesota from
1954 to 1960. His sudden illness and untimely death occurred in the same year
that he moved to Northwestern University. His work on topological groups,
geometry and analysis were outstanding contributions to modern mathematics. In
year 2001, we proposed to enhance the Yamabe Memorial Lecture by creating the
Yamabe Memorial Symposium, a top-level biennial geometry conference in the
School of Mathematics, University of Minnesota. Every two years, perhaps in the
Fall of even-numbered years, mathematicians will gather at the University of
Minnesota for a long weekend to hear geometry talks, discuss the latest research
and interact with graduate students and junior researchers. In each biennium, a
specific area within geometry will be singled out for special emphasis.

One goal will be, as a way to honor the memory of Hidehiko Yamabe, to advance
areas of mathematics related to his interests, which touched in a substantial
and ground-breaking way on several quite different areas of mathematics, all of
which may be roughly described as having significant geometric aspects. At the
same time, it will provide a valuable opportunity for graduate students and
junior researchers to interact with, and learn from, mathematicians working at
the highest international level. Finally, a long-lasting benefit will be the
stimulation of innovative developments in mathematics research.

The first, second and third Yamabe Memorial Symposium were held in 2002, 2004
and 2006 respectively with a great success.

The conference web page is http://www.math.umn.edu/yamabe/.




