
* 0805989
* Application of methods of arithmetic geometry and homological algebra to quantum field theory and string theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2010,08/26/2010
* Albert Schwarz,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2014
* USD 196,252.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0805989 Principal Investigator: Albert Schwarz

The first of these projects concerns applications of p-adic methods to
topological strings. The goal of these projects is to express physical
quantities in terms of arithmetic geometry over p-adic numbers and to use these
expressions to prove integrality theorems. Another set of investigations deals
with supersymmetric deformations of quantum field theories. This is joint work
with M. Movshev and applies the theory of L-infinity and A-infinity algebras.
Another project is devoted to the analysis of the relation between string theory
and quantum field theory. The principal investigator has argued that quantum
field theory can be formulated such that time and space do not appear as primary
notions, and is planning to show that string theory can be regarded as a quantum
field theory in this sense.

These research projects are based on the application of methods of modern
mathematics to physics, particularly making use of arithmetic geometry and
homological algebra to improve our understanding of quantum field theory and
string theory. Sophisticated mathematics originally developed for other purposes
such as the study of Diophantine equations in number theory seems to bear
directly on challenging issues in theoretical physics.
