
* 0805878
* The Semiclassical Limit and Geometric Quantization
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 04/15/2010,06/18/2010
* Alejandro Uribe,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2014
* USD 196,001.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0805878 Principal Investigator: Alejandro Uribe

The principal investigator will study aspects of the relationship between the
semiclassical behavior (i.e. as Planck's constant tends to zero) of quantum-
mechanical objects with their geometric counterpart in phase space. More
specifically, problems to be investigated include: Direct and inverse spectral
problems for Schrodinger operators in various semi-classical settings, rigorous
analyses of semiclassical approximations commonly used in the physics and
quantum chemistry communities (Bohr-Sommerfeld conditions, approximate
propagators and computation of correlation functions), as well as quantum-
mechanical analogies of constructions in symplectic geometry (like symplectic
cutting). The settings will be both classical (when the phase space is
Euclidean) and more geometric (e.g. when the phase space is a compact Kahler
manifold or the cotangent bundle of a configuration space).

The relationship between mathematics and physics is profoundly important for
both the theory and applications of these subjects. In one direction,
mathematics is the language of physics and its methods can have powerful
applications; in the other, physical problems often give rise to new
mathematical problems that can be extremely fruitful. The proposed research will
study problems at the interface between quantum mechanics and geometry. The
problems are generally of two kinds: spectral, meaning related to the energy of
a quantum system, and dynamical, comparing the evolution of a quantum system
with its classical counterpart. The spectral problems seek to understand the
relationship between the possible energy levels of a quantum system and the
geometry of the corresponding classical system. The dynamic problems should
result in a better understanding of the underpinnings of some popular
computational methods in quantum chemistry.
