
* 0805328
* Affine Manifolds, Log Geometry, and Mirror Symmetry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2008,04/20/2010
* Mark Gross,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2011
* USD 310,000.00

M. Gross plans to study the geometry of mirror symmetry for Calabi-Yau
manifolds. This will be done from the perspective of an algebro-geometric
version of the Strominger-Yau-Zaslow conjecture introduced by M. Gross and B.
Siebert. Associated to certain sorts of large complex structure limit
degenerations of Calabi-Yau manifolds one can define an intersection complex,
which is an affine manifold with singularities. Conversely, given an affine
manifold with singularities, Gross and Siebert showed it is possible to build
explicitly such a degeneration in terms of "tropical" data on the affine
manifold with singularities. M. Gross plans to study applications of this
construction, and in particular intends to work towards the goal of showing that
this construction provides a geometric explanation for mirror symmetry.
Ultimately, it will be shown that the same tropical structures determine both
numbers of rational curves and period calculations on the two different sides of
mirror symmetry.

The work proposed by M. Gross lies at the intersection of string theory and
geometry. String theory replaces the traditional notion of the point particle
with a small loop of string, moving through space-time. To make string theory
compatible with quantum mechanics, space-time must be ten-dimensional. Since
space-time appears four-dimensional, one expects six of these dimensions to be a
very small "curled up" geometric object. These geometric objects are called
Calabi-Yau manifolds. In the early 1990s, string theorists proposed a remarkable
association between completely different Calabi-Yau manifolds: certain
calculations extremely difficult to perform on one Calabi-Yau manifold could be
completed by performing completely different, and much easier, calculations on a
different Calabi-Yau manifold. This discovery was known as mirror symmetry.
Since this time, many geometers have been trying to understand the mathematics
behind this miraculous observation. The work of M. Gross hopes to give
mathematical insight and explanation for the phenomenon of mirror symmetry.
