
* 0808631
* Nonlinear Geo metric Equations of Monge-Ampere Type and Canonical Metrics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/10/2007,05/08/2008
* Jian Song,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 82,332.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0604805 Principal Investigator: Jian Song

This proposal concerns existence and regularity problems of the nonlinear Monge-
Ampere type equations from geometry and physics. The problem of finding
canonical metrics on a compact Kahler manifold has been the subject of intense
study over the last few decades. In his solution to Calabi's conjecture, Yau
proved the existence of a Kahler-Einstein metric on compact Kahler manifolds
with vanishing or negative first Chern class. An alternative proof of Calabi's
conjecture is given by Cao using the Kahler-Ricci flow. However, most projective
algebraic varieties do not have definite or trivial first Chern classes.
Recently Perelman has made major breakthrough in Hamilton's program as an
approach to the Poincare conjecture and Thurston's geometrization conjecture.
The principal investigator proposes to study the canonical metrics on the
canonical models of projective varieties of positive Kodaira dimension by
applying the Kahler-Ricci flow. Such canonical metrics are constructed by the
deformation of the Kaher-Ricci flow on minimal projective surfaces of positive
Kodaira dimension. These generalized Kahler-Einstein metrics can be considered
as an analytic version of the abundance conjecture in algebraic geometry and
will also lead to new advances in the understanding and application of the Ricci
flow. In Donaldson's far reaching program, the geometry of the infinite
dimensional symmetric space of Kahler metrics in a fixed class is related to the
existence and uniqueness of constant scalar curvature Kahler metrics. The
principal investigator also intends to study the uniform approximation problem
of the Monge-Ampere geodesics in infinite dimensional symmetric space by those
in the finite dimensional Bergman spaces on toric varieties. The precise
understanding of this problem will give new insight into the conjecture proposed
by Yau between the relation of constant scalar curvature Kahler metrics and
certain stability in the sense of geometric invariant theory. The principal
investigator will also apply the moment map point of view and study various
geometric flows arising from Kahler geometry as well as symplectic geometry
proposed by Donaldson. The first is the J-flow, which is the gradient flow of
functional related to the Mabuchi energy. The second is a moment map flow in a
hyperkahler four manifold. The principal investigator intends to study the
question of convergence and singularities os such parabolic flows.

Since the discovery of the general relativity, geometric analysis has become
crucial to both mathematicians and physicists. Problems in this proposal arise
naturally from our attempts to understand nonlinear differential equations from
geometry and physics. The solutions to these problems will contribute to various
fields of sciences such as physics and cosmology in the deep understanding of
our universe. The method of analyzing the singularities of nonlinear equations
will have wide applications in engineering and economics.
