
* 0835507
* The Geometry, Topology and Combinatorics of Hamiltonian Lie Group Actions
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 04/15/2008,05/08/2008
* Tara Holm,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 67,058.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0604807 Principal Investigator: Tara S. Holm

The principal investigator's principal focus in this proposal is group actions
and reduction in symplectic geometry. A fundamental problem in symplectic
geometry is to relate the geometry and topology of a Hamiltonian system to the
combinatorics of the moment polytope, and vice versa. The principal players on
the geometric side include the symplectic manifold itself and its symplectic
reductions. Combinatorially, the vertices, edges, k-dimensional faces, and even
the chambers of the moment polytope play a significant role. Generically, a
symplectic reduction has orbifold singularities. The principal investigator
outlines a program towards understanding the geometry and topology of such
orbifolds. These results will provide insight into the structure of the Chen-
Ruan orbifold cohomology ring, yielding information about orbifold Gromov-Witten
invariants. This work has also naturally led to foundational questions regarding
group actions on orbifolds. Finally, the PI will distill the geometry and
topology of the Hamiltonian system into combinatorial data associated to the
moment polytope. This will shed new light on recent combinatorial results
concerning intervals in the Bruhat order on any Coxeter group.

Symplectic geometry is the mathematical framework for describing phenomena in
mathematical physics, from classical mechanics to string theory. The moment map
is an important tool that translates the symmetries of a physical system into
discrete data. An expert in symplectic geometry, the PI will achieve a deeper
understanding of the relationship between the geometry of a symplectic manifold
and the combinatorics of the moment map data. Her work will shed light on
stringy invariants in this context. The proposed activities will advance our
knowledge in the fields of symplectic geometry and combinatorics, with
applications to algebraic geometry, algebraic topology and mathematical physics.
The PI's broader objectives include increasing the participation and visibility
of women in research mathematics, and enhancing the undergraduate experience in
mathematics.
