
* 0846978
* CAREER: Holomorphic Curves in Algebraic Geometry and Symplectic Topology
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2009,05/17/2013
* Aleksey Zinger,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2015
* USD 443,068.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0846978 Principal Investigator: Aleksey Zinger

The invention of pseudo-holomorphic curves techniques in the 1980s
revolutionized symplectic topology, profoundly impacted algebraic geometry, and
led to astounding connections with string theory. This project has three
distinct directions, motivated by this interplay between different fields. The
primary one is a detailed study of deformations of such curves, for arbitrary as
well as generic complex structures. It aims at the fundamental understanding of
properties of pseudo-holomorphic curves, including Gromov-Witten invariants
(counts of such curves) and more qualititative aspects of their behavior (e.g.
existence, uniruledness, etc.). The aim of another direction is to apply
techniques employed in the PI's proof of the string theory prediction for the
genus 1 GW-invariants of a quintic threefold in many other setting, testing
additional mirror predictions and going beyond them. The third direction would
further develop the PI's local excess intersection approach and its applications
to classical enumerative geometry.

String theory is a physical model that represents elementary particles by
vibrating strings with the aim of unifying the four fundamental forces of
nature. As such srings move in space, they sweep out Riemann surfaces, also
called holomorphic curves. While string theory is one of the main paradigms in
physics today, it has yet to make any experimentally testable predictions.
However, it has generated plenty of mathematical predictions and led to
fundamental developments in symplectic topology and algebraic geometry,
especially in relation to (pseudo-) holomorphic curves. This proposal aims to
further test string theory mathematically, while deepening the mathematical
understanding of such curves with an eye toward applications to more classical
problems in geometry. Some of the projects in this proposal will pursued by
graduate students under the PI's supervision.

This award is jointly supported by the programs in Geometric Analysis and in
Algebra, Number Theory, and Combinatorics.
