
* 0904197
* Floer homology in mirror symmetry and in symplectic topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/15/2009,09/13/2009
* Yong-Geun Oh,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,297.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0904197 Principal Investigator: Yong-Geun Oh

This project aims at providing a description of Fukaya categories of toric
manifolds and of Calabi-Yau threefolds, and establishing the mirror
correspondence between the Fano toric A-model and the Landau-Ginzburg B-model
based on the general Lagrangian Floer theory established by the PI jointly with
Fukaya, Ohta and Ono. It also proposes to solve the simpleness problem of the
area preserving homeomorphism group of the two sphere (and the disc) by
investigating the extension problem of Calabi homomorphisms and Entov-
Polterovich's quasi-morphisms to the Hamiltonian homeomorphism group. In
addition, the PI proposes to apply the machinery of Floer theory to symplectic
topology of toric manifolds and construct new quasi-morphisms on the Hamiltonian
diffeomorphism group and Entov-Polterovich's symplectic quasi-states on toric
manifolds. The PI anticipates that the proposed research will not only provide
solution to the homological mirror symmetry of Fano toric A-model and Landau-
Ginzburg B-model but also lead to deeper understanding of open-closed Floer
theory and its applications to dynamical systems and symplectic topology.

The Hamiltonian formalism played a fundamental role not only for solving
problems in classical mechanics but also for transforming the classical
mechanics into quantum mechanics. It also plays an important role in deriving
many basic physical equations in high energy physics ranging from quantum field
theory to modern string theory. The natural space where the Hamiltonian
formalism can be exercised is the symplectic manifold (or more generally the
Poisson manifold). One of the most distinguished geometric objects of study in
symplectic manifold is the Lagrangian submanifold; For example, `the state of a
particle with zero momentum in space' forms a Lagrangian submanifold in `all
possible states of a particle in space' which forms a symplectic manifold.
Understanding the interplay between geometry of Lagrangian submanifolds and
dynamics of Hamiltonian flows is the core theme of symplectic topology. The PI's
proposed research aims at extending the Hamiltonian dynamics to the level of
continuous dynamics and solving various problems arising from Hamiltonian
dynamics and mirror symmetry. It also aims at easing the access of graduate
students and researchers from other related fields into the study of Floer
theory and mirror symmetry by writing a graduate level textbook on Floer
homology and its applications to symplectic geometry.
