
* 0905909
* Singularity Behavior in Some Geometric Variational Problems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2009,06/02/2011
* Robert Hardt,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2013
* USD 444,885.00

Abstract for DMS - 0905909 Singularity Behavior in Some Geometric Variational
Problems Robert Hardt (Rice University)

This project lies in the area of geometric calculus of variations, which treats
the formation and behavior of singularities and concentration structures for
various optimal or stationary functions, fields, measures, or geometric
structures, possibly subject to constraints. The first specific class of
projects involves continuing work with T. Riviere, on relations between the pth
power energy of a map between Riemannian manifolds and its homotopy class. In
various higher dimensional cases, energy concentration of limits of smooth
mappings to a manifold may produce new geometric topologically nontrivial
objects and is related to the nonvanishing homotopy of the manifold. This
concentration behavior corresponding to any nontorsion homotopy invariant can
now be described, and bubbling related to torsion invariants is being
investigated for variational problems. We also are attacking higher order
Sobolev spaces which seem more natural for certain homotopy classes, but for
which basic approximation results and constructions have not been previously
studied. Work with Thierry De Pauw involves the study of chains, cochains,
charges, and the higher dimensional calculus of variations in general metric
spaces with general coefficient groups. We consider a variety of mass-type
functionals and the notion of a flat chain which generalizes the finite mass
metric-space currents of Ambrosio-Kirchheim and the rectifiable and flat
Euclidean-space G- chains of B.White. Semi-algebraic maps, chains, forms, and
various structures generalized from geometric measure theory continue proving
useful in work with Pascal Lambrechts on the topology of algebraic varieties,
including the real homotopy theory. Also metric properties of varieties are to
be approached using special classes of metric chains and cochains. Other studies
include microstructure computation, combined transport-shape problems with
applications to imaging, and the existence and regularity of optimal trusses.

Solutions to many variational problems in both pure and applied mathematics
often are forced to have singularities, that is, to involve regions where large
oscillations occur. For example a nematic liquid crystal material in a spherical
container whose optical axis is forced to point outward on the container
necessarily will have singularities inside (observable through cross-polarizers
or x-ray diffraction). In this example the optical axis has an energy density,
which measures its local rate of change and whose integral tends to have a
minimum value among all possible configurations. Our research proposes to
understand the relationship between energies in such variational problems and
the topological barriers imposed by the physics of these problems. We have
derived new notions which allow the treatment and precise geometric and analytic
description of a wide variety of problems from soap films (which locally
minimize area) and their higher dimensional generalizations to optimal transport
paths in various complex media. The goal in these applications of geometric
calculus of variations is to develop sufficient mathematical tools to model,
compute, and predict physical behavior. Geometric constraints which occur
naturally in many physical problems have led to new mathematical and
computational issues. In particular, three that we are now studying involve flow
problems in image processing, microstructure formation in certain crystalline
materials, and geometric analysis of large data sets.


