
* 0905923
* Geometry and Mathematical Physics of D-Branes
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2009,07/06/2011
* Paul Aspinwall,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2014
* USD 347,629.00

The derived category of coherent sheaves has become a powerful tool in recent
years in algebraic geometry. Remarkably this category also appears naturally in
the mathematical physics of superstring theory where objects are D-branes, i.e.,
boundary conditions on open strings, and morphisms are Hilbert spaces associated
to open string states. The proposer will investigate several aspects of this
connection. The mathematics of tilting collections, quiver representations and
matrix factorizations will be applied to notions such as monodromy, stability
and moduli spaces to further understand string theory. It is expected that this
research will lead to insight into the mathematics of the derived category of
Calabi-Yau threefolds which play a central role in this proposal.



String theory aims at providing an understanding of the fundamental physics of
our universe, particularly the geometry of spacetime at short distances. The
mathematics of string theory requires the use of sophisticated techniques from
modern geometry. Indeed, ideas from string theory have inspired many recent
important developements in the pure mathematics of geometry. This proposal will
explore the connection between D-branes, which in a sense are subspaces of
spacetime, and algebraic geometry, in which geometry is expressed purely in
terms of algebraic equations. It is expected that new results both in pure
mathematics and mathematical physics will be obtained.
