
* 0906264
* Topics in Differential Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2009,08/26/2009
* Yat Sun Poon,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2012
* USD 90,120.00

While contact geometry is a classical subject in differential geometry and
classical mechanics, it is also a subject of intensive investigation from many
different perspectives in the past twenty five years. The PI of this proposal
will focus on the differential geometric aspects of contact structures.
Traditionally, contact structures are recognized as an odd-dimensional analogue
of symplectic structures. In the past five years, investigation on symplectic
structures is extended to the category of generalized complex structures. In
this proposal, the PI will develop a corresponding theory for contact 1-forms on
odd-dimensional manifolds, with a focus on integrability and deformation. While
the starting point of proposed theory is similar to that of generalized complex
structures, the related concept on integrability and the subsequent deformation
theory are expected to the substantially different. A completion of this project
will enable contact structures to deform in a non-trivial and controlled manner,
extend a deformation theory on Sasakian geometry and develop a weak mirror
symmetry theory on odd-dimensional spaces.

The origin of the topics for investigation in this project could be traced to
classical mechanics. Its modern needs are due to theoretical physics.
Mathematically, this project is concerned with one's ability to manage and
manipulate the solutions of a system of equations defined an odd-dimensional
spaces. The equations are determined by the geometric or physical nature of the
spaces. This project is built upon the development of a corresponding theory on
even-dimensional spaces in the past five years. However, the difference in the
parity of the dimension of the concerned spaces poses striking difference in the
nature of the geometry and its related equations. Therefore, this project will
development new concepts and new tools to manage the difference.


