
* 0906204
* Symplectic Topology of Hamiltonian Systems with Infinitely Many Periodic Orbits
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/15/2009,09/02/2009
* Basak Gurel,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 136,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0906204 Principal Investigator: Basak Gurel

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The main long-term objective of the proposed work is to examine the reason for
the existence of infinitely many periodic orbits for a variety of Hamiltonian
dynamical systems. The first part of the proposal is comprised of several
interconnected projects addressing this question for certain classes of
Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms and also for specific Hamiltonian systems such as
twisted geodesic flows. The PI will tackle these problems by making use of
methods from symplectic topology including Floer homological techniques,
spectral invariants, Hamiltonian Ljusternik-Schnirelman theory, the Seidel
representation as well as methods from differential geometry such as
h-principles. Among more specific tools pertinent to this investigation are
local Floer homology, the mean index, the properties of action and index spectra
and of action and index gaps, and geometric and dynamical properties of the
symplectically degenerate maxima. The techniques utilized by the PI also have
applications beyond establishing the existence of infinitely many periodic
orbits. In particular, the PI's approach to the projects in the second part of
the proposal draws heavily on one of her recent works on the periodic orbits
problem. The PI outlines a method of proving that the diameter of the group of
Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms is infinite for many symplectic manifolds, including
some new instances. Another group of problems considered in this proposal
concerns the symplectic topology of coisotropic submanifolds and some of its
applications.

Hamiltonian systems constitute a broad class of physical systems where
dissipative forces can be disregarded. For example, the planetary motion in
celestial mechanics and the motion of a charged particle in a magnetic field are
usually treated as Hamiltonian systems. One general, but not universal, feature
of such systems is that they tend to have numerous periodic orbits.
Corresponding to the cyclic motion, this is the simplest dynamical phenomenon
after equilibrium and an investigation of periodic orbits of a system is crucial
in understanding its global behavior. For a broad class of Hamiltonian systems,
the number of periodic orbits is known to be infinite and this is thought to be
the case for many (but not all) Hamiltonian systems. Yet, establishing the
existence of periodic orbits often requires advanced and powerful mathematical
tools. The proposal focuses on the existence problem for infinitely many
periodic orbits of Hamiltonian dynamical systems in a variety of settings and on
applications of the techniques used by the PI to attack this problem to some
other related questions. The projects in the last part of the proposal concern a
certain class of spaces which arise, for instance, in the study of Hamiltonian
systems with symmetries. The proposed work is related to and has potential
applications in mathematical physics, and geometric and quantum mechanics.
