
* 0954606
* CAREER: Ergodic Theory of Nonamenable Group Actions
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/2010,02/03/2010
* Lewis Bowen,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2013
* USD 499,993.00

This project is concerned with three subjects within the ergodic theory of
nonamenable group actions: entropy, rigidity/flexibility phenomena, and
pointwise ergodic theorems. Since Kolmogorov's initial breakthrough (1958),
dynamical entropy has played a major role in the ergodic theory of amenable
actions. The principal recently discovered a generalization of Kolmogorov's
entropy to actions by sofic groups. This class of groups contains many familiar
and interesting groups, including all linear groups, thereby providing the first
extension of entropy theory to certain nonamenable groups. This new development
opens the door to an abundance of problems that could have a great impact in
ergodic theory and other fields (e.g., statistical physics, probabilistic
combinatorics, operator algebras). In the last decade, there has been an
explosion of interest in rigidity theory for nonamenable group actions (see, for
example, works of A.Furman, D. Gaboriau, and S. Popa). New results indicate
that, under special conditions, measure-conjugacy is equivalent to a priori
weaker forms of equivalence of actions, such as orbit equivalence and von
Neumann equivalence. It is expected that the principal investigator's new
entropy theory can make an important contribution to rigidity theory by
determining more precisely when it is an orbit equivalence or von Neumann
equivalence invariant. The principal investigator has recently proven the first
orbit equivalence flexibility results in the nonamenable setting. It is expected
that the techniques developed for the proof will be more broadly applicable and
could result in a general orbit equivalence flexibility theory for certain
groups and actions. Pointwise ergodic theorems have a long history, beginning
with Birkhoff. In collaboration with A. Nevo, the principal investigator is
developing general methods for proving pointwise ergodic theorems for actions of
discrete, nonamenable groups. Successes so far include new pointwise ergodic
averaging sequences for actions of free groups and the first pointwise ergodic
theorems for actions of general word-hyperbolic groups with respect to ball and
spherical averages. The new techniques remove a fundamental obstacle in that
they reduce the problem to the amenable case, which can then be solved by the
classical Wiener-Calderon-Folner theory.

The educational component of the project includes yearly workshops at Texas A&M
for the purposes of introducing graduate students to the latest research
developments and bringing together the diverse groups of researchers working in
areas important to the project. The principal investigator plans to mentor
undergraduates through his department's honors program and to give popular talks
at math club meetings and during his department's summer programs for
undergraduates and high school students. The principal investigator also plans
to invite an expert expositor as a distinguished lecturer to give a series of
inspiring talks on topics of current interest. This project directly provides
for the training of a graduate student. It should be easy to attract one because
the principal investigator's recent results are accessible and lead to an open
field of problems whose solutions could have significant impact in ergodic
theory and other areas.
