
* 1001115
* Analysis of some L-infinity variational problems and Aronsson's equation, Ericksen-Leslie system modeling hydrodynamic flow of liquid crystals
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2010,08/17/2011
* Changyou Wang,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 167,752.00

The goal of this project is to advance the principal investigator's research on
the analytic issues arising from two areas: (i) the L-infinity variational
problem and the associated Aronsson equation, and (ii) the hydrodynamic flow of
nematic liquid crystal materials. L-infinity variational problems study the
minimization problem of appropriate cost functionals that are suprema of
integrand functions. The area has become very active recently. Particular foci
of the first part of the project are the following: to identify the most general
conditions guaranteeing that the equivalence relationship between absolute
minimizers of quasi-convex Hamiltonian functionals and viscosity solutions to
the highly degenerate Aronsson equation holds; to explore uniqueness issues for
general Aronsson equations with spatial dependence; to study the homogenization
problem for L-infinity variational problems in the framework of gamma
convergence; and to investigate L-infinity variational problems under Dirichlet
energy constraints.The second part of this project deals with the Ericksen-
Leslie system modeling hydrodynamic flows of nematic liquid crystals. This is a
strongly coupled system relating the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation of
the underlying fluid velocity field and the transported heat flow of harmonic
maps for the director field of the nematic liquid crystal materials. The
objective is to establish both existence and partial regularity for Leray-Hopf-
type weak solutions in dimension three.

The proposed problems not only are mathematically important but also have
potential applications to other fields of mathematics, applied science, and
materials engineering. The nonlinear partial differential equations or systems
involved in the project either are highly degenerate elliptic problems or
equations with super-critical nonlinearities whose resolutions will definitely
contribute new ideas and techniques that will be useful in a variety of
contexts. So-called L-infinity variational problems arise in a number of
different areas such as the determination of optimal radiation treatments in
chemotherapy, image analysis and recovery engineering, and the design of winning
strategies in certain types of random games. In mechanical engineering, the
Ericksen-Leslie system is among the most fundamental equations used to describe
the dynamics of viscoelastic fluids, including nematic liquid crystals. Rigorous
analysis of both the existence and the regularity of various solutions to such a
system can predict the formation of singularities, allow researchers to gain
insight into turbulent phenomena, and justify both computational and
experimental studies made by applied scientists and engineers. This project will
result in the publication of monographs and lecture notes, involve active
training of advanced graduate students, and include the organization of specific
conferences or workshops.
