
* 1004171
* Cycles, Plurisubharmonic Functions and Nonlinear Equations in Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2010,04/03/2012
* H. Blaine Lawson,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2014
* USD 345,999.00

This project is concerned with the study of cycles and their boundaries,
generalized plurisubharmonic functions, and nonlinear partial differential
equations. The proposal has several interrelated parts. The first concerns the
groups of algebraic cycles and cocycles on a projective variety X. The aim is to
understand these groups and relate them to the global structure of X. The
investigator has, with others, established a theory of homology type for
algebraic varieties based on the homotopy groups of cycles spaces. This theory
will be used to study concrete questions about algebraic spaces. Implications
for real algebraic geometry will be explored. Striking connections to universal
constructions in topology which emerged in prior research will also be
investigated. The second part of the proposal concerns cycles which bound
holomorphic chains in projective manifolds. In particular, characterizations in
terms of projective linking numbers and quasi plurisubharmonic functions will be
sought. This will entail a deep analysis of the structure of projective hulls, a
concept analogous to polynomial hulls, which has been introduced by the
investigators and is of independent interest. Projective hulls are related to
approximation theory, pluripotential theory, and the spectrum of Banach graded
algebras. The third topic, an important part of the proposal, concerns the
Dirichlet problem for fully nonlinear partial differential equations on
riemannian manifolds. Interesting progress was recently made on this question
and the investigation will continue with an eye to further applications.
Motivation for this study came from the investigators' development of
pluripotential theory in calibrated and other geometries, where notions of
plurisubharmonic functions, pseudo-convex domains, capacity, etc. were
introduced and shown to have many of the properties known in the classical
complex case. With the new analytic developments, deeper questions in this field
will be addressed. This part of the project should have a major impact in
calibrated geometry, which in turn plays an important role in M-theory in modern
physics. There should also be applications to symplectic geometry and to
p-convexity in riemannian geometry. The final area concerns analytic approaches
to differential characters and generalizations, developed by the investigator
and R. Harvey. These objects mediate betweeen cycles and smooth data. In the
complex category this involves an analytic study of Deligne cohomology. It
yields invariants for bundles and foliations, and retrieves the classical Abel-
Jacobi mappings. This project will also be concerned with student development,
including an undergraduate educational effort aimed at fostering mathematical
independence and developing interactive environments.

A concept of central importance in geometry is that of a ``cycle''. In
algebraic geometry a cycle corresponds to the simultaneous solution of a system
of polynomial equations. In differential geometry they arise in many ways: as
the large scale solutions of certain differential equations, and as the level
sets and singularity sets of differentiable mappings. Curves and surfaces in
space are simple examples. Cycles with a particular geometry also play a
fundamental role in modern physical theories. This proposal is concerned with
the study of cycles across this broad spectrum. In the algebraic setting, cycles
have been related to fundamental large-scale geometry of their surrounding
space. This discovery has revealed surprizing and important relationships
between spaces of algebraic cycles and fundamental constructions in algebraic
topology and has led to new insights in both fields. This work will be
continued. Another area of investigation concerns cycles which form the boundary
of subsets with special geometric structure. They represent non-linear versions
of classical boundary value problems in analysis. Such questions arise in many
contexts. The proposer has formulated conjectures relating important classes of
such cycles to questions in approximation theory and Banach algebras. Successful
resolution will establish a series of new results in complex geometry and should
lead to significant new insights in several other fields of mathematics. A
third, and very important, part of the proposal concerns the Dirichlet problem
(the prescribed boundary-value problem) for fully nonlinear partial differential
equations in various geometric settings. Interesting progress was recently made
on this question and the investigation will continue with an eye to further
applications. Motivation for this study came from the investigators' extension
of classical pluripotential theory to very general geometric settings. These
include calibrated geometries, symplectic and Lagrangian geometries, and much
more. An uncanny amount of the classical theory has already been shown to hold
in this general context. With the new analytic developments, deeper questions in
this field will be addressed. This part of the study is, in a certain strict
sense, dual to the study of the special cycles appearing in these geometries. It
should apply to Special Lagrangian cycles in Calabi-Yau manifolds, and
associative and Cayley cycles in G(2) and Spin(7) spaces. These latter subjects
play an important role in M-theory in modern Physics. A forth domain of
investigation concerns a mathematical apparatus developed by the proposer and R.
Harvey to detect subtle relationships between cycles and the global structure of
the space they live in. This apparatus encompasses some of the most effective
tools historically developed for this purpose, and it is much more general.
Further development of this theory and its applications will be pursued. This
project will also be concerned with graduate student development.Students will
be part of the research team. There will also be an undergraduate educational
effort aimed at fostering mathematical independence and developing interactive
environments.
