
* 1005888
* Determinants of non-self-adjoint elliptic operators in geometry and physics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2010,06/10/2010
* Maxim Braverman,MA,Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2014
* USD 195,781.00

We study geometric invariants defined using regularized determinant of non-self-
adjoint elliptic operators. In particular, we continue to study the complex
valued refinement of the Ray-Singer torsion introduced in our joint paper with
T. Kappeler using the graded determinant of the odd signature operator. This
leads to new properties of both the Ray-Singer torsion and the eta-invariant. We
suggest a refined version of the Bismut-Lott higher analytic torsion which
contains more information and is easier to study than the original higher
torsion. It also provides a link between the higher analytic torsion and the
higher eta-invatriant of Bismut and Cheeger. We suggest a version of the refined
analytic torsion for complex Calabi-Yau manifolds. This leads to a multi-
dimensional generalization of the Dedekind eta-function. We also consider a new
regularization procedure for definition of the trace and the determinant of
certain class of pseudo-differential operators on odd-dimensional manifolds.
This procedure allows to avoid many anomalies coursed by usual zeta-function
regularization. It also turns out to be the most adequate for description of
non-linear sigma-models of superconductivity. In a joint project with A. Abanov
we suggest to use this regularization to compute the Berry phase in some of
these models.

We use different extension of the notion of determinant and trace from finite
matrices to differential operators in oder to construct new mathematical
objects. This leads to new invariants of manifolds as well as to the new
information about the old invariant. When applied to certain complex manifolds
it gives a generalization of a classical Dedekind eta-function and new
applications to number theory. We apply a new construction of a determinant to
obtain a new description of some models of superconductivity. This new
description allows to compute so called Berry phase in many examples.
