
* 1005745
* Dirac operators on cobordisms: degenerations and surgery
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2010,05/26/2010
* Liviu Nicolaescu,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2014
* USD 102,952.00

A Morse function on a manifold decomposes the manifold into infinitely many
hypersurfaces (level sets). The typical level set is smooth but a few of them
have singularities. A Dirac operator on the manifold induces Dirac-type
operators on these level sets. The investigator intends to prove that the index
of the original operator can be recovered from invariants capturing
infinitesimal behavior of this family of induced operators along finitely many
of these level sets. More precisely the index will be a sum of two types of
invariants: soft and hard invariants. The soft invariants are described by
infinitesimal spectral flows near finitely many smooth level sets, while the
hard invariants are described by the Kashiwara-Wall indices of triplets of
infinite dimensional lagrangian spaces canonically determined by the singular
level sets.

The Dirac type equations are generalizations of the famous Maxwell's equations
of the electromagnetism. A solution of such an equation can be viewed as a sort
of stationary electromagnetic wave on the Universe under investigation, known as
the background manifold. The number of solutions of a Dirac equation is highly
dependent on the shape of the manifold (or Universe). Morse theory is a
technique of investigating the shape of a manifold by decomposing it into
certain elementary pieces. The investigator intends to explain how to compute
the number of solutions of a Dirac equation by studying the behavior of this
equation on these elementary pieces of space.
