
* 1005761
* Asymptotic Hodge Theory and Instantons
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2010,08/24/2010
* Mark Stern,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2014
* USD 170,001.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1005761 Principal Investigator: Mark A. Stern

The PI's proposed research focuses on several problems related to the existence
and geometry of connections minimizing the Yang-Mills and related energy
functionals of connections on vector bundles over manifolds of special holonomy
and on smooth projective varieties. In the first project the PI, in joint work
with Bianca Santoro, will study critical points and parabolic flows of the
energy, E', given by the L2 norm of the (0,2)component of the curvature tensor.
In many special geometries where the de Rham cohomology is all of type (p,p),
they will attempt to prove holomorphicity of connections that are stable
critical points of E'. They will also study obstructions to the long time
existence of solutions to the gradient flow for E'. The primary goal of this
project is to improve our understanding of when vector bundles admit holomorphic
structures. In a related project, joint with Benoit Charbonneau, the PI will use
techniques from geometric quantization to study refined Hodge structures on
isomorphism classes of vector bundles on smooth projective varieties. They will
study the large k asymptotics of the projection operator onto the kernel of a
generalized Diracoperator associated to a bundle F tensored by the kth power of
a polarizing line bundle.They have used these asymptotics to define a refined
Hodge filtration on bundles and will attempt to exploit the asymptotics further
to prove that the Chern character mapping from bundles to de Rham cohomology
(equipped with its usual Hodge structure) respects these new Hodge filtrations.
Connection analogs of Donaldson's balanced metric conditions arise in this
study. The PI will seek corresponding analogs of Gieseker stability. In joint
work with Savdeep Sethi, the PI will study the moduli space of instantons on
RxT^3, interpolating between flat connections on T^3, with unequal Chern Simons
invariants.

The physics of the strong, weak, and electromagnetic forces is based on gauge
theory, the study of differential calculus on vector bundles. The primary
objects in these gauge theories are connections, which may be viewed as rules
for defining differentiation. The primary energy guiding the dynamics in these
physical theories is the Yang-Mills energy, and the fields dominating the
physics are those that minimize the Yang-Mills energy. In dimensions greater
than 4, the existence and structure of these optimal connections are poorly
understood. In 4-dimensions, optimal connections have been a powerful tool for
answering questions in geometry and topology. In higher dimensions they can
potentially provide extremely important techniques for attacking questions in
differential and algebraic geometry. In particular, they may give techniques for
transforming questions involving the solutions of complex partial differential
equations to dramatically simpler algebraic problems. As the current theories of
quantum gravity all require an understanding of physics in dimensions greater
than 4, there is strong interplay between the physical and geometric study of
optimal connections. In fact, the antecedents to this project arose from
questions posed to the PI by physicists; the answer to these questions then led
to new results in geometry.
