
* 1006610
* Function Theory on Symplectic Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/15/2010,12/11/2012
* Leonid Polterovich,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2014
* USD 324,200.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1006610 Principal Investigator: Leonid Polterovich

The proposed research belongs to symplectic geometry and topology, a rapidly
developing field of mathematics which originally appeared as a geometric tool
for problems of classical mechanics. The "symplectic revolution" of the 1980s
gave rise to the discovery of surprising rigidity phenomena involving symplectic
manifolds, their subsets and diffeomorphisms. A number of recent advances show
that there is yet another manifestation of symplectic rigidity, taking place in
function spaces associated to a symplectic manifold. These spaces exhibit
unexpected properties and interesting structures, giving rise to an alternative
intuition and new tools in symplectic topology, and providing a motivation to
study the function theory on symplectic manifolds. Development of this new
theory and its applications is the main objective of the proposed research. We
focus on the following topics. First, we study robustness of the Poisson
bracket. The Poisson bracket is a basic operation which involves a pair of
functions and is defined by their derivatives. Certain characteristics of the
Poisson bracket exhibit surprising robustness properties with respect to small
perturbations in the uniform norm, even though such perturbations can
dramatically change the derivatives. This phenomenon appears to be closely
related to Hofer's geometry on the group of symplectic diffeomorphisms. Second,
we deal with various aspects of the theory of symplectic quasi-states. Consider
the space of functions on a symplectic manifold. A symplectic quasi-state is a
monotone functional on this space which is linear on every Poisson-commutative
subalgebra, but not necessarily on the whole space. The origins of this notion
go back to foundations of quantum mechanics. Non-linear quasi-states on higher-
dimensional manifolds are provided by Floer theory, the cornerstone of modern
symplectic topology. Quasi-states serve as a useful tool for a number of
problems in symplectic topology such as symplectic intersections and Lagrangian
knots. Finally, we unify both topics and explore interrelations between
symplectic quasi-states and Poisson brackets.

Symplectic topology fruitfully interacts with several areas of science, which
have a significant impact on society through their applications to technology.
One of these areas is Hamiltonian dynamics, a mathematical discipline providing
efficient tools for modeling a variety of fundamental physical and technological
processes such as orbital motion of satellites, propagation of light in optical
fibers and motion of charged particles through accelerators. Another one is
quantum theory, a branch of physics which studies behavior of matter on
microscopic scales, and whose potential applications reach as far as
cryptography and computer technology. Development of function theory on
symplectic manifolds that is put forward in the present proposal leads to a new
insight on robust measurements in Hamiltonian dynamics and reveals a new facet
of the quantum-classical correspondence, a fundamental principle of quantum
theory.
