
* 1007164
* Quantum Hirzebruch--Riemann--Roch Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2010,06/12/2012
* Alexander Givental,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2014
* USD 277,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1007164 Principal Investigator: Alexander Givental

The project will pursue various problems of Gromov-Witten theory, that is, the
theory of topological invariants of phase spaces of Hamiltonian systems. Our
research focuses on the axiomatic structure of Gromov-Witten invariants, their
generalizations, their relationships with integrable systems and singularity
theory, and methods of their computation, including those associated with
Riemann-Roch theorems and the mirror conjecture. A central goal of this project
is to resolve or advance a decade-old open problem of expressing Gromov-Witten
invariants of Kahler manifolds defined as holomorphic Euler characteristics of
complex vector bundles in terms of cohomological invariants of these bundles.
Such expression would establish a true "quantum" analogue of the Hirzebruch-
Riemann-Roch theorem. As a technical tool, the orbifold version of the classical
Hirzebruch-Riemann-Roch theorem will be applied to Kontsevich's moduli spaces of
stable maps. Applications of the theory to finite difference equations and
integrable systems, representation theory of quantum groups, and the mirror
symmetry phenomenon are expected.

From a more general perspective, problems we deal with in our research lie on
the crossroad of two major pathways in mathematics of the last two centuries.
One of them is the in-depth pursuit of the intricate properties of algebraic
curves - in the form inherited from works of Gauss, Abel, Jacobi, Riemann, Klein
and Poincare. The other is the broad conceptual landscaping of mathematical
physics dictated by the progress of classical and quantum mechanics and often
associated with the names of Hamilton, Maxwell, Gibbs, Poincare, Hilbert,
Einstein and Weyl. It is string theory that in the search for the ultimate laws
of nature places algebraic curves at the center of the modern landscape of
fundamental physics, and generates new mathematical questions and points out
plausible answers with an amazing pace and persistence. Some of the problems we
work on are motivated by such questions, some others hopefully provide answers
that string theory did not really anticipate.
