
* 1007177
* Floer homology, low-dimensional topology, and mirror symmetry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,05/08/2013
* Denis Auroux,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2015
* USD 436,443.00

This project studies the applications of symplectic geometry, and in particular
Lagrangian Floer homology, to mirror symmetry and to low-dimensional topology.
Lagrangian submanifolds and Fukaya categories lie at the heart of Kontsevich's
homological mirror symmetry conjecture and the Strominger-Yau-Zaslow approach to
the construction of mirror pairs. The project will focus on geometric phenomena
such as instanton corrections in order to gain a better understanding of mirror
symmetry and broaden its scope. Lagrangian submanifolds also play a key role in
low-dimensional topology, where they enter in the construction of various
invariants of 3- and 4-manifolds (closed or with boundary). This motivates the
study of bordered Heegaard-Floer homology of 3-manifolds and invariants of
broken Lefschetz fibrations on 4-manifolds from the perspective of Fukaya
categories of symmetric products, with the aim of providing a richer algebraic
framework and revealing new connections.

Broadly speaking, this project aims to reinforce the existing connections
between various areas of geometry, topology and mathematical physics. Modern
theoretical physics has had a tremendous impact on mathematics, and in
particular on geometry, where equations arising from field theories have led to
new invariants of topological spaces and new conjectures about their geometry.
One goal of the project will be to clarify the mathematical validity and scope
of predictions inspired by string theory, relating two different areas of
mathematics to each other (algebraic geometry, which studies sets defined by
polynomial equations, and symplectic geometry, which studies the phase spaces of
classical mechanics). On the other hand, the same mathematical ideas have
applications to the study of the topology of three and four-dimensional spaces.
More specifically, the aim is to explore how slicing such spaces along two-
dimensional surfaces can lead to new interpretations of various topological
invariants.
