
* 1007508
* Geometric group theory, analysis on metric spaces, and geometric flows
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/18/2009,11/07/2012
* Bruce Kleiner,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2013
* USD 289,379.00

Abstract

The proposed research is in geometric evolution equations, analysis on metric
spaces, and geometric group theory. The evolution equations in the proposal are
mean curvature flow and Ricci flow, and the problems pertain to the structure of
the singular set, and issues such as rectifiability, uniqueness of tangents, and
uniqueness of model flows. The proposed research in analysis on metric spaces
has two focal points: bilipschitz embedding problems (and related issues) and
the structure of boundaries of Gromov hyperbolic spaces. The projects in
geometric group theory are a continuation of my earlier work, which is
influenced by Gromov's papers "Hyperbolic groups" and "Asymptotic invariants of
infinite groups", rigidity theory, 3-manifolds, and geometric mapping/function
theory; their principal aim is to address rigidity and
uniformization/geometrization problems for groups by analyzing their asymptotic
structure with a variety of tools from geometry, analysis, topology, dynamics
and combinatorics.

The project aims to study two nonlinear analogs of the heat equation: evolution
of surfaces by mean curvature, and Hamilton's Ricci flow. Evolution by mean
curvature has been studied for decades as a natural model for evolving surface
interfaces. Ricci flow describes an evolving geometry, and was used in
Perelman's recent solution of the Poincare conjecture. The primary objective of
the proposed research on these equations is to study singularities and show that
they have a very special form. Another component of the research program is an
investigation of spaces which have a self-similar or fractal character, using
analytic tools that have been developed in the last few years. Here one of the
goals is to deform the space into an optimal form, if possible, in order to
reveal hidden symmetries, and otherwise show that no hidden symmetries exist.
This is very useful for understanding the asymptotic shape of infinite groups,
and is part of confluence of several research trends over the last 10-15 years.
Another application of similar ideas is to embedding problems in theoretical
computer science: Cheeger and the PI were able to give a natural, new
counterexample to the Goemans-Linial conjecture in computer science.
