
* 1007347
* Isoperimetric Inequalities
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2010,05/25/2012
* Erwin Lutwak,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2014
* USD 439,470.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1007347 Principal Investigator: Erwin Lutwak, Christoph Haberl, Deane
Yang, Gaoyang Zhang

The aim of this project is to develop modern extensions of the classical Brunn-
Minkowski theory (often called the theory of mixed volumes) in convex geometric
analysis. Over the years, the PIs have established a number of fundamental
affine isoperimetric inequalities and their analytic counterparts. Newly
developed methods (by the PIs and others) will be exploited to attack long-
conjectured inequalities. One of the PIs showed how an old notion of p-sum of
convex bodies leads to an embryonic p-Brunn-Minkowski theory. The p-inequalities
which arise in the new theory turn out to be almost invariably stronger than
their classical counterparts. Recent advances have demonstrated the need to move
to the next evolutionary step in the development of the Brunn-Minkowski theory:
An Orlicz Brunn-Minkowski theory. Very recently, the PIs have succeeded in
discovering the Orlicz analogue of two fundamental operators from the Brunn-
Minkowski theory and have established the fundamental affine isoperimetric
inequalities for them. The development of an Orlicz Brunn-Minkowski theory will
be a main focus of the PIs efforts. Just as the classical Minkowski problem is a
central focus of the classical Brunn-Minkowski theory, its p-analogue is central
to the p-Brunn-Minkowski theory. The Orlicz versions of this elliptic partial
differential equation are a central focus of the Orlicz Brunn-Minkowski theory
and a sustained attack on this partial differential equation will be undertaken.
The study of projections and intersections of convex bodies is fundamental and
of significant practical value. The Brunn-Minkowski theory together with the
cosine transform from harmonic analysis are ideal tools for the study of
projections. There is a fascinating duality in convex geometry. One of the PIs
initiated the study of the dual Brunn-Minkowski theory, which together with
Radon transforms are the necessary tools for the study of intersections and to
solve long-standing open problems as shown by previous work of one of the PIs
and others. Continued development of the dual Brunn-Minkowski theory is
proposed. Work of the PIs and others, indicates that there are interesting
connections between Information Theory (a subject usually associated with
Electrical Engineering) and convex geometric analysis. The PIs will continue
their exploration of the interactions between these subjects.

The Brunn-Minkowski theory is the core of convex geometric analysis and is the
foundation of subjects such as geometric tomography and stereology. These
subjects investigate mathematical problems with strong practical backgrounds
such as measuring the diffusion capacity of the lung, determining the volume of
minerals in rocks, and detecting tumors in the human body. Numerous applications
of the Brunn-Minkowski theory have been discovered in mathematics, science and
engineering. For example, the reconstruction of hidden objects from information
regarding sections (think CAT scan machines) involves a tomographic analysis.
The proposed work should result in the development of new theories and
techniques in convex geometric analysis which are potential new mathematical
tools with applications to science and engineering.
