
* 1007113
* Module categories in geometry and topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2010,08/24/2010
* Jonathan Block,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2014
* USD 177,001.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1007113 Principal Investigator: Jonathan L. Block

These projects aim to unify two main approaches to noncommutative geometry. The
first, represented by Connes, is differential geometric and analytic in nature.
The second, represented by Kontsevich et al, is algebraic geometric and
categorical. The project deals with duality statements such as Mukai-duality and
mirror symmetry from algebraic geometry and mathematical physics and the Baum-
Connes conjecture from operator K-theory and noncommutative geometry. These
dualities are expressed in terms of categories of modules. He develops a new
framework essential to describe these dualities. In various geometric contexts,
e.g. complex geometry, generalized complex geometry, and noncommutative
geometry, the geometric structure is encoded in a certain curved differential
graded algebra. He develops the module theory of such differential graded
algebras in such a way that he can recover the triangulated category of sheaves
with coherent cohomology on a complex manifold. This framework provides a common
context for the noncommutative geometry of Connes and that of Kontsevich. The PI
proposes to use this framework to study the following situations. PI will
analyze how Mukai equivalences behave under deformations. For example, if one
starts with a Mukai equivalence between two complex manifolds and deforms one of
the manifolds as an algebroid stack, then it is possible to determine how the
other manifold deforms and prove a Mukai equivalence for these two new objects.
This generalizes two previous works of the PI and coauthors. Second, he defines
a curved dga corresponding to a symplectic manifold. The framework then gives a
dg-category. He will study how this relates to the Fukaya category. Next the PI
will study the rational homotopy of non-nilpotent spaces within the context of
this framework. Finally, PI proposes to study the Beilinson Bernstein
localization theorem within the context of Connes noncommutative geometry, and
relate it to the Baum Connes conjecture.

An exciting development over the past several years has been the proliferation
of new kinds of geometries as well as surprising links between well known ones.
These developments have been motivated by work in many areas within mathematics
as well as fundamental particle physics and engineering. The proposed work will
create a framework to study these new geometries as well as to express
dualities, that is the links, between them. By its broad nature, this study will
bring a cross-section of mathematics and mathematicians, as well as researchers
in other fields in contact with the PI, his colleagues and his students. In
addition to his teaching, the PI offers seminars for graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows that introduce them to a broader understanding of geometry and
their dualities. The PI speaks internationally at conferences that bring
together topologists, algebraic geometers and physicists. PI also cultivates
connections to the finance industry, and develops courses and training material
in mathematics of finance, to serve as a resource for undergraduates. PI seeks
out undergraduate and high school mathematics students to introduce them to
research in mathematics.
