
* 1013334
* Extremality of symmetry in nonpositive curvature, geodesics, and the dynamics of large group actions.
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2009,02/03/2010
* Benjamin Schmidt,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2012
* USD 132,002.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The general theme of this proposal is to find properties of the most symmetric
spaces and dynamical systems that uniquely characterize these spaces. The PI
proposes projects related to this goal with an emphasis on the following: a)
understanding the bounded cohomology groups of locally symmetric spaces of
noncompact type, b) finding properties of geodesics that characterize symmetric
spaces of compact type, and c)Zimmer's program of classifying actions of lattice
subgroups of higher rank noncompact simple Lie groups on closed manifolds.

Symmetry appears throughout forms in nature such as animals, crystals, and
snowflakes. Mathematicians exploit symmetry on a regular basis in their work
since symmetric spaces and systems are usually the easiest to understand
theoretically. Moreover, a detailed understanding of these spaces and systems
frequently leads to a better understanding of less symmetric objects. The PI
will investigate the interplay between properties of geodesics (or shortest
paths between points) in a space and symmetry exhibited by that space. For
example, since the surface of the Earth is not perfectly round, its geodesics
should differ from those of an idealized sphere.


