
* 1016317
* Pacific Rim Workshop in Geometric Analysis, Vancouver, Summer 2010
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 05/01/2010,04/27/2010
* Jeff Viaclovsky,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 10/31/2011
* USD 24,000.00

The Pacific Rim Workshop on Geometric Analysis will be held at UBC/PIMS,
Vancouver, Canada, July 20-30, 2010. The first week will be a summer school, and
the second week will be a research-oriented conference. This workshop/conference
will bring together experts from all over the world in geometric analysis. The
core areas of concentration will be (i) Geometric flows: Ricci flow, Mean
Curvature Flow, Willmore Flow, (ii) K\"ahler-Einstein metrics, constant scalar
curvature metrics and K\"ahler-Ricci flow, (iii) Mathematical General Relativity
Theory, (iv) Manifolds with positive curvature, and (v) Minimal submanifolds.
These are currently some of the most active research areas in geometric
analysis. There are broader applications of many of these topics to other areas
of mathematics, such as algebraic geometry, and also applications to related
physical fields, such as general relativity and string theory.

This conference will have a significant educational component. The first week
will consist entirely of mini-courses geared towards graduate students. The aim
is to give sufficient background in the main scientific areas, so that the
participants will be able to follow the more recent developments. These will be
presented in the second week, where there will be 16-18 research-level talks.
The conference will be advertised though PRIMA and through a conference website
in order to build as diverse an audience as possible. The organizing committee
will encourage applications from female mathematicians. Lecture notes from the
mini-courses and workshop will be posted on the conference webpage, and will be
widely disseminated to mathematicians at all levels. The funding from the NSF
will be used to provide travel and lodging expenses for fifteen workshop
participants from the United States. Preference will be given to graduate
students, postdocs, and junior faculty who do not have their own travel funding
sources.
