
* 1045119
* EMSW21-RTG: Training the Research Workforce in Geometry, Topology and Dynamics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 08/15/2011,07/14/2015
* Ralf Spatzier,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2018
* USD 2,500,000.00

This proposal calls to continue our research training program in geometry,
topology and dynamics at the University of Michigan. Recent Ph.D.'s and advanced
graduate students will be the main beneficiaries. The Mathematics Department at
UM has one of the largest and most vigorous post-doctoral and graduate programs
in the country, with an excellent record of producing high-quality researchers
in geometry, topology and dynamics. We will bolster the training of post-docs
and graduate students in these areas by deepening and broadening their education
and providing the trainees with ample opportunities to excel in their research.
Five senior faculty members (Richard Canary, John Erik Fornaess, Gopal Prasad,
Yongbin Ruan and Ralf Spatzier) will lead this project in collaboration with
other senior faculty. We introduced various innovations into our current
training program, and will continue them and expand on them: We will provide
intensive exploratory seminars, lecture series and workshops. All trainees will
develop lecturing skills, and will benefit from intensive mentoring. Some
trainees will deepen their scientific training by traveling to other
institutions at the forefront of research. Finally, we will expose
undergraduates to research in the these areas via REU's. We involve postdocs in
REU activities, thus training them to supervise research.

Geometry, topology and dynamical systems are core areas of mathematics. Geometry
investigates the shape of spaces, through invariants such as curvature. Topology
explores the properties of spaces which remain invariant under continuous
deformations. One basic such invariant, the genus, is the number of "holes" in a
surface. Dynamical systems concern the evolution of a physical or mathematical
system over time. Especially in recent years, geometry and dynamics have
developed in mutually beneficial interaction. Case in point are topology,
geometry and complex dynamics in low dimension which in many aspects mirror each
other. Many of the most exciting developments in these areas are truly
interrelated, and benefit from each other either by idea, analogy or actual
tool. At the same time, connections with other fields such as group theory,
algebraic geometry and mathematical physics have strengthened dramatically.
These developments have been amazing in their breadth and depth, and demonstrate
the vitality of these areas.
