
* 1047602
* Contact and Symplectic Structures and Holomorphic Curves
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2010,08/09/2010
* Helmut Hofer,NJ,Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2012
* USD 330,473.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0603957 Principal Investigator: Helmut Hofer

The field of symplectic geometry has a large interface to other mathematical
disciplines, like algebraic geometry, differential topology (particularly in
small dimensions) and dynamical systems to name a few. Dr. Hofer's project is
concerned with the study of fundamental aspects of symplectic geometry, its
applications to dynamical systems, as well as the development of mathematical
technology to address analytical problems arising in the field. One part of the
project is devoted to the study of Symplectic Field Theory (SFT) which currently
is the most general and most comprehensive theory of symplectic invariants.
Another part develops a general approach for studying certain classes of
nonlinear elliptic partial differential equations as they occur in SFT. These
methods potentially should have other applications in nonlinear analysis as
well. A third part is devoted to the applications of the theory to dynamical
systems. The aim is the development of mathematical infrastructure, based on a
combination of Floer theory and the theory of finite energy foliations due to
Dr. Hofer and his collaborators. This research aims at the understanding of
long-term behavior of iterated area-preserving disk maps with its numerous
applications.

Many physical systems like the flow of an incompressible ideal fluid, the
movement of a satellite under the gravitational forces of celestial bodies, or
the movement of charged particles in a magnetic field, to name a few, are
examples of so called dynamical systems. The mathematical theory of dynamical
systems provides tools to understand their complex behavior and allows to make
predictions. The particular examples mentioned above are of so-called
Hamiltonian nature and have an intricate structure leading to extreme
complicated dynamical behavior. Stabilizing a beam of particles in a partic= le
accelerators, or sending a probe on an interstellar journey, or understanding
the dynamics of a stationary flow of an incompressible ideal fluid are problems
whose mathematical underpinnings are touched by the research proposed in this
project. Some of the methods developed potentially have application to larger
classes of partial differential equations of relevance in physics.
