
* 1058342
* Global Harmonic Analysis and Asymptotic Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 02/15/2010,06/09/2011
* Steve Zelditch,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2013
* USD 437,684.00

Global harmonic analysis is concerned with the impact of global geometry,
particularly the geodesic flow, on the behavior of eigenfunctions, eigenvalues
and waves on a Riemannian manifold. One of the best known areas of global
harmonic analysis is Quantum Chaos, which concerns the impact of ergodicity or
mixing of the geodesic flow on semi-classical limits of eigenfunctions and
eigenvalues. Nalini Anantharaman and I are continuing our joint work in quantum
ergodicity on hyperbolic surfaces, where we are constructing an explicit
intertwining operator between classical and quantum dynamics. Using the
hyperbolic Poisson operator, I reduced the study of quantum limits to the ideal
boundary and am studying boundary distributions of eigenfunctions. Dynamics also
can be used in inverse spectral theory. Hamid Hezari and I have recently proved
that any analytic domain with mirror symmetries across all axes are determined
by their Dirichlet spectra. We are currently relating our results to Birkhoff
normal forms. John Toth, Hans Christianson and I are also developing a new area
of quantum ergodic restriction theorems, where eigenfunctions are ergodic after
being restricted to hypersurfaces. In another direction, global harmonic
analysis is useful in constructing approximate solutions of the complex
homogeneous Monge Ampere equations governing geodesics in the space of Kahler
metrics. Rubinstein and I are using complex Fourier integral operator methods to
solve the Cauchy initial value problem for geodesics. With Shiffman and Zeitouni
I am continuing also my work on random holomorphic fields on Kahler manifolds.
This is another kind of asymptotic geometry where the number of zeros tends to
infinity.

Global harmonic analysis and asymptotic geometry is the use of ideas and
techniques of quantum mechanics to solve problems in geometry, analysis and
mathematical physics. A famous problem is to whether one can hear the shape of a
drum, i.e. tell the shape from the frequencies of vibration. One would also like
to know the shapes and sizes of the modes of vibration, and the structure of the
nodal sets where the drum is not moving as it vibrates. For two hundred years,
the frequencies and shapes of modes of vibration have been important in physics
and engineering, both for actual drums and also for atoms and molecules. It
turns out that one can learn a lot about modes of vibration by playing billiards
on the drum head. By looking carefully at waves moving along bouncing ball
orbits (billiard trajectories which hit the domain orthogonally at two points
and endlessly bounce back and forth between these points), one can determine the
entire shape of an analytic drum. Morever, when the billiards are chaotic then
one can determine the patterns of nodal sets, where the drum is still as it
vibrates. My research gives rigorous proofs of these statements.


