
* 1104533
* Index Theory on Singular Spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2011,08/25/2011
* Pierre Albin,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2015
* USD 147,793.00

The principal investigator proposes to study various aspects of index theory on
singular spaces. The PI and his collaborators will, for example, apply their
recent analysis of the resolution of the orbit space of a group action to the
index theory of a family of equivariant operators. A similar resolution, but of
an arbitrary pseudomanifold, will be used in a project to understand the
properties of the signature operator and extend the class of spaces known to
satisfy the Novikov conjecture from topology. A related project aims more
generally to extend many of the methods of geometric microlocal analysis to the
setting of stratified spaces. The PI will also work with his collaborators to
understand the spectral geometry of non-compact or singular spaces, with
projects to understand isospectrality for non-compact surfaces and extend the
class of spaces where the topological Reidemeister torsion can be expressed
analytically. Finally, the PI is involved in various efforts to extend the
number of mathematicians aware of these results and working in this field,
including the production of lecture notes and survey articles as well as the
organization of conferences and seminars.

Singular spaces arise naturally in mathematics and physics, even when one is
interested in studying smooth phenomena. For instance, recent models in
cosmology and particle physics require an understanding of spaces with
singularities such as corners and edges. However, many of the techniques used in
geometric analysis do not apply to singular spaces. One aspect of this proposal
is to contribute to the development and application of new techniques to
problems arising in index theory and spectral geometry. These problems are in
the intersection of analysis with other fields, such as topology, algebraic
geometry, and mathematical physics, a confluence which is a source of both
problems and applications.
