
* 1104392
* Mean Curvature Flow, Manifolds with Ricci curvature bounds, Representations of Isometry groups, and Eigenfunctions
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2011,07/19/2013
* Tobias Colding,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2016
* USD 389,000.00

The first part of the proposed research concerns what happens to a hypersurface
under the mean curvature flow. We are particularly interested in hypersurfaces
that are in general or generic position before the flow start. The mean
curvature flow is the negative gradient flow of volume, so any hypersurface
flows through hypersurfaces in the direction of steepest descent for volume and
eventually becomes extinct in finite time. Before it becomes extinct,
topological changes can occur as it goes through singularities. Thus, in some
sense, the topology is encoded in the singularities. The proposed project
further develops the theory of generic mean curvature flow that the PI has
initiated with Minicozzi. We have already classified all generic singularities
and one of the main task now is to completely understand the flow itself and
show that indeed a generic hypersurface only go through generic singularities.
The first key point is to prove a stable manifold theorem, that is, to prove
that in a neighborhood of an unstable self-shrinker the stable manifold is
contained in a hyper-graph. We expect that these results will have a number of
applications and plan to pursue them. A second part concerns manifolds and
spaces with Ricci curvature bounds and give some new estimates for these
manifolds and various applications of these estimates, in particular to Einstein
metrics. A third part concerns representations of isometry groups and
fundamental groups of open manifolds into general linear groups of finite
dimensional vector spaces. The final and smaller part is about bounds for nodal
sets (or zero sets) of eigenfunctions.

When a surface evolves over time by locally moving it in the direction where the
area decreases the fastest it is said to be moving by mean curvature flow.
Mathematically, this leads to a nonlinear partial differential equation which is
formally similar to the equation that governs the flow of heat in physics.
Moving interfaces occur in a wide range of scientific and engineering
applications. Mean curvature flow and other geometric flows were developed for
their intrinsic beauty as well as their potential applications to other fields
to model, for instance, option pricing, motion of grains in annealing metals,
and crystal growth. While key foundational results have been obtained, several
of the most basic questions remain unanswered. Many applications are expected
both within and outside mathematics.
