
* 1104734
* Topological recursion, the Laplace transform, and integrable systems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2011,07/19/2012
* Motohico Mulase,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2015
* USD 129,668.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1104734 Principal Investigator: Motohico Mulase

The project is aimed at identifying the geometric structure of the Eynard-
Orantin recursion formula that was originally discovered in random matrix theory
and statistical physics. A particular emphasis of the project is placed on
developing a point of view of the Laplace transform as the mirror map. The goal
of the project is to solve the Remodeling Conjecture in algebraic geometry due
to string theory physicists Marino and Bouchard-Klemm-Marino-Pasquetti. The
Remodeling Conjecture presents a concrete and universal recursion formula, based
on the complex analysis of a Riemann surface, that computes both closed and open
Gromov-Witten invariants of an arbitrary toric Calabi-Yau 3-fold. Bouchard and
Marino proposed a conjecture on Hurwitz numbers as a limit case of the
Remodeling Cojecture. They defined a sequence of generating functions of simple
Hurwitz numbers, and conjectured that these quantities satisfy the Eynard-
Orantin recursion formula. The Bouchard-Marino conjecture was solved by the PI
and his collaborators in 2009-10. The current understanding that has emerged
since the publication of the PI's papers is the following. The Gromov-Witten
theory of a toric Calabi-Yau 3-fold is a combinatorial counting problem on the
A-model side of a topological string theory. The generating function of the
solution to this counting problem satisfies a combinatorial equation, called the
cut- and-join equation by Zhou. Now take the Laplace transform of this function.
The result is a symmetric meromorphic function defined on the product of a
Riemann surface. This Riemann surface is identified as the mirror curve of the
toric Calabi-Yau 3-fold. The Laplace transform of the combinatorial equation
becomes (conjecturally) the Eynard-Orantin recursion on the B-model side. The
PI's contribution to this general picture is the identification of the role of
the Laplace transform as the mirror map. This type of the Laplace transform was
further investigated in the PI's recent papers, and has been utilized by other
researchers in solving many related problems.

Pure mathematical research is about a sharp excitement of discovery. This
excitement energizes young students in science and engineering. The PI has been
collaborating with both undergraduate and graduate students, engaging them into
the heart of the research excitement. Instead of peeking into research
experience, these students have participated in the real excitement of
mathematical discovery. These lasting impacts have inspired the students to
become research mathematicians, and they are continuing to produce new results.
The relation between algebraic geometry, symplectic geometry, combinatorics,
random matrix theory, topology, integrable systems, and string theory in the
Gromov-Witten theory was apparent in the early 1990s. After a long time of
extremely fruitful developments in each individual area, we are back to a new
level of interaction once again. Instead of pushing an existing problem or
conjecture, the proposed project is aimed at understanding a new point of view.
It is expected to bring a further cross-fertilization of these quite different
ideas/areas in mathematical sciences. The PI has organized several workshops
specifically aimed at this subject in the last two and a half years, which were
attended by many young researchers. He will continue to do so for further
dissemination.
