
* 1104352
* Rigidity theorems in geometry and topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 10/01/2011,09/14/2011
* Krishnan Shankar,OK,University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 09/30/2015
* USD 141,622.00

The proving of rigidity theorems in geometry and topology is ubiquitous not just
in these areas but in the modern approach to mathematics. Two of the finest
examples of such theorems are the Sphere theorem of Rauch, Klingenberg and
Berger (which restricts the global topology under geometric constraints) and the
Mostow Rigidity theorem (which restricts the geometry under topological
constraints). To this end the PI proposes to study more general spaces and
investigate rigidity phenomena for them. In previous work with R. Spatzier and
B. Wilking we showed that a manifold with sectional curvature less than or equal
to 1 and a conjugate point along every geodesic at t equal to pi; is (locally)
isometric to a compact, rank one symmetric space. This led to a natural question
about other possible rigidity phenomena along these lines: Is there rigidity if
we have the same condition on conjugate points but assume sectional curvature
greater than or equal to 1? There has been significant progress on this question
in collaboration with Ben Schmidt and Ralf Spatzier. In joint work with C.
Sormani we extended the notion of conjugate points and proved classical theorems
for complete length spaces. This leads to the question of extending rigidity
theorems to spaces with two sided curvature bounds in the sense of Toponogov. We
have some preliminary results in this more general setting. Several other
projects are proposed including the study of Riemannian submersions from compact
Lie groups (continuing recent work in this area) and studying the geometry of
low cohomogeneity actions on round spheres.

Most of us have an intuitive understanding of the term, "curvature". Tabletops
and desktops are flat while basketballs and saddles are curved. The surface of
our planet is curved as well, and we know the controversy that generated in
Columbus' time! The mathematical study of the curvature of objects is the
purview of differential geometry. Geometers are able to quantify curvature
precisely and it provides a numerical invariant that helps distinguish objects.
One may distinguish objects by shape or nature. For instance, the surface of a
doughnut and the surface of a coffee cup have the same nature i.e., they are
both surfaces with one hole, but they are shaped differently. On the other hand,
the surface of a ball (usually called a sphere) is different in shape and nature
from the surface of a doughnut (usually called a torus). How can we be sure that
this is always the case? One may wonder if it is possible to deform the sphere
suitably so that we might end up with the torus. This is the kind of problem
that differential geometry can tackle with relative ease. A sphere has positive
curvature everywhere while it can be shown that no matter what shape a torus
takes, it will always have zero curvature somewhere. This tells us that the two
objects are somehow fundamentally different from each other. Results of this
kind are of interest to geometers as well as physicists. Differential geometry
is the language used to express the general theory of relativity, our best
theoretical description of gravity and its effects on the universe. In general
relativity, a vacuous space-time universe would be inherently flat. This
idealized state is warped by the presence of masses or energy, due to their
gravitational effects. Thus, gravity is the curvature in space-time, and this is
used to explain phenomena such as black holes and gravitational lensing. My are
of research is the study of objects in higher dimensions (just as spacetime is
four dimensional) that have positive curvature and exhibit rigidity properties
under suitable additional geometric restrictions. In higher dimensions, matters
are far less visually apparent. One deals almost exclusively with equations and
sophisticated geometrical techniques that describe the curvature of manifolds, a
term that refers to objects that, roughly speaking, have no sharp edges.
Manifolds of bounded size are called compact manifolds. One of the great
mysteries in the study of positive curvature is the dearth of examples of
(compact) manifolds that have positive curvature at every point. The techniques
at hand are few and the number of known examples remains relatively small.
Therefore, any light that one can shed on the structure of such manifolds would
be valuable. Structure theorems such as these are what might lead us some day to
determine the precise shape of the universe.
