
* 1205312
* Groups in Geometry and Topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2012,09/09/2013
* Michael Kapovich,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2016
* USD 313,890.00

Most directions of the research supported by this grant revolve around geometry
of group actions on various spaces and geometric structures on manifolds, as
well as geometry of buildings. In more details, research conducted by M.
Kapovich concerns: (1) Geometry of buildings with applications to representation
theory. Kapovich intends to continue his study of the geometry of the moduli
spaces of polygonal linkages in symmetric spaces and buildings in relation to
the algebraic groups. Part of this study is establishing tropical structures on
Euclidean buildings. (2) Kleinian groups in higher dimensions: Kapovich will
study finiteness properties of higher-dimensional Kleinian groups. (3)
Fundamental groups of complex-projective varieties: Kapovich will study
fundamental groups of irreducible complex-projective varieties whose
singularities are normal crossings. (4) Kapovich will study embeddings of Right-
angled Artin Groups in the group of di&#64256;eomorphisms of the circle. (5)
Semihyperbolicity of Teichmuller space: Kapovich will study coarse nonpositive
curvature properties of Teichmuller space. (6) Kapovich will study
classification of fundamental groups of closed 4-dimensional manifolds M with
trivial 2nd homotopy group.

The goal of this research is to understand better interaction between geometry
and groups. Groups appear naturally as symmetries of natural geometric objects.
Simple examples of such symmetries come from wall-paper tilings (where geometry
is Euclidean) or tilings appearing is some of the Escher pictures (hyperbolic
geometry). Furthermore, groups appear as symmetries of geometric objects of
physical nature, from elementary particles to the entire universe (treated as a
geometric object). Algebra (group theory) allows one to encode the underlying
symmetries, and, conversely, geometry allows one to approach successfully purely
algebraic problems. One of the examples of such interaction of seemingly
different mathematical fields is project (3), which aims to apply groups of
symmetries of 3-dimensional hyperbolic space to complex-algebraic geometry (the
latter deals with geometry of solution spaces of systems of polynomial equations
with complex variables).
