
* 1205597
* Geometry and Dynamics in Riemannian and Finsler Spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2012,08/28/2012
* Dmitri Burago,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2015
* USD 145,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1205597, Principal Investigator: Dmitri Burago

The principal investigator proposes to continue his work on a number of long-
term projects in Riemannian and Finsler geometry, dynamical systems of geometric
origin, and geometric group theory. The main projects include: geometry of
surfaces in normed spaces, ellipticity of surface area functionals, boundary
rigidity and related inverse problems, and asymptotic geometry of tori; study of
partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms; conjugation-invariant quasi-norms; "area
structures and spaces." The projects that form the core of the proposal have
already yielded a number of important results. Among the problems the proposal
is aimed at are Michel's Boundary Rigidity Conjecture, Pu's conjecture,
Busemann's Conjecture that flats in normed spaces are area-minimizers,
classifications of partially-hyperbolic systems, studying "area structures,"
finding geometric (conjugation-invariant) and "non-dynamical" (not asymptotic)
invariants of diffeomorphisms, and various generalizations of the E. Hopf
Conjecture. In his previous research, the principal investigator was lucky to
solve a number of such problems, including Michel's conjecture for nearly flat
metrics, non-existence of partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms on the 3-sphere,
the E. Hopf Conjecture on tori without conjugate points, the "Boltzman-Sinaj"
problem on the existence of uniform estimates on the number of collisions in
hard ball gas models, 2-dimensional cases of Busemann's problem mentioned above,
Furstenberg's problem on the existence of bi-Lipschits non-equivalent separated
nets and Moser's problem on Jacobian determinants of Lipschitz homeomorphisms, a
problem of Hopcroft and Ullman on the complexity of the Split-Find problem, and
Shefel's problem on the unboundedness of an immersed complete cylinder with
finite total curvature (all from the 40s-70s). Most of the conjectures and
directions of the research suggested in this proposal grew from ideas and
methods developed by the PI and his collaborators while working on these
problems, and the projects described in the proposal continue previous research.
The PI has recently started a new research direction, discretization in
Riemannian geometry. The new approach is very different from the (classical) PL
one, but it addresses both metric and spectral approximations (for differential
operators).

If one peels off most of confusing mathematical terminology, all parts of the
project deal with very practical and even computational understanding of
geometric structures. One sends sound waves through the Earth and measures how
long it take for them to travel from points to point (sound - because higher
frequency waves dissipate, one cannot do X-rays of the Earth, and sound waves
are easily detected by seismographs). From this data, how can one figure out
what is inside the Earth? The physical analogs of large-scale invariants of
periodic metrics are macroscopic properties of periodic media (such as a
crystal), and one wants to relate these properties to microscopic
characteristics; similarly, study of partially hyperbolic systems, geodesic
flows, billiard systems, and geometric complexity may result in better
understanding of (stability of) many models in thermodynamics, biology,
sociology, and physics, especially when dealing with imprecise data (and in
practice, one always deals with imprecise data). If one wants to do a concrete
analysis of a complicated geometric object (say, a Riemannian manifold), one has
to deal with some finite approximations. Of course in dimension 2 gluing our
space out of a bunch of triangles works, but in higher dimension we lose most of
its geometric structure. There are more general approximations, but relating
their characteristics to geometric properties of actual objects turns out to be
a challenging mathematical task.
