
* 1206827
* Mean curvature flow and geometric analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2012,07/09/2013
* William Minicozzi,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/28/2014
* USD 285,487.00

The PI proposes, jointly with Toby Colding, to continue their investigations on
mean curvature flow and related areas of geometric analysis, including projects
on the uniqueness of tangent cones for Einstein manifolds. The first broad area
of the proposal centers on the study of singularities in MCF, including
estimates for the size of the singular sets, a compactness theorem for the
possible types of singularities, a classification of generic singularities of
the flow, and a canonical neighborhoods theorem that describes the flow in a
neighborhood of the generic singularities. These are the most important
questions about singularities and the PI and his collaborator have already
obtained significant results in this direction. The second main area of the
proposal concerns the structure of Einstein manifolds and, in particular, the
question of when an Einstein manifold has a unique asymptotic structure (or
tangent cone at infinity). The main prior result in this direction is due to
Cheeger and Tian in 1994, where they showed uniqueness under an integrability
assumption that the PI would like to remove. These sort of uniqueness questions
have played an important role in a number of areas of geometric analysis and are
extremely important in understanding the structure of the singular set for
limits of Einstein manifolds.

This project focuses on several geometric variational problems. The problems are
mathematical, but many of them arose first in science and engineering. Perhaps
the most natural geometrically are minimal surfaces that locally minimize their
surface area and, thus, model soap films in perfect equilibrium (so the film
does not change other time). These have been studied at least since Lagrange's
1762 memoir, but recent years have seen breakthroughs on many long-standing
problems in the theory of minimal surfaces, with important contributions from
many mathematicians. There is a time-varying analog of this where a surface
(which is not in equilibrium) evolves to minimize its surface area as quickly as
possible; this is called mean curvature flow or MCF. Mathematically, this leads
to a nonlinear partial differential equation which is formally similar to the
equation that governs the flow of heat in physics. Clearly, minimal surfaces
remain static under the MCF. MCF and other geometric flows were developed for
their intrinsic beauty as well as their potential applications to other fields
to model, for instance, option pricing, motion of grains in annealing metals,
and crystal growth. While key foundational results have been obtained, several
of the most basic questions remain unanswered. In contrast, the Einstein
equation is a nonlinear differential equation for the curvature of a space (or a
space-time in general relativity). Hilbert realized a century ago that this
comes up variationally as the Euler-Lagrange equation for the Einstein-Hilbert
functional.
