
* 1206290
* Pacific Northwest Geometry Seminar
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 04/01/2013,03/18/2013
* James Isenberg,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2018
* USD 31,500.00

This award provides partial support for meetings of the Pacific Northwest
Geometry Seminar (PNGS) to be held during 2013-2015 at Portland State
University, Stanford University, the University of Oregon Eugene, and the
University of Washington Seattle. The first meeting is on May 11-12, 2013 at
Portland State University. Invited research talks by leading experts in
differential geometry, geometric analysis, symplectic and contact geometry are
complemented by discussion sessions in which the speakers and participants
assess the state of various areas in geometry, and highlight open problems in
these areas.

There are a number of very active researchers in geometry scattered throughout
the various universities which are involved in the Pacific Northwest Geometry
Seminar. These periodic meetings bring these researchers together for
consultation, collaboration, and stimulation of new ideas. A significant number
of research programs have been initiated as a result of interactions at these
meetings. The PNGS is especially valuable for graduate students in geometry at
the various participating universities which have small geometry groups. The
PNGS meetings give these students an excellent opportunity to see the broader
picture of research in geometry. The meetings are also very valuable for the
growing number of geometers working at some of the smaller universities in the
region, such as Pacific University, Lewis and Clark, Seattle University, and
Idaho State.

More information can be found on the conference website located at
www.math.washington.edu/~lee/PNGS
