
* 1207720
* Hyperbolic 3-manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2012,08/13/2012
* Marc Culler,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2016
* USD 375,000.00

This proposal is motivated by the unification between the topology and the
geometry of three-dimensional manifolds. It is primarily focused on the
quantitative geometry of hyperbolic 3-manifolds, specifically on estimating such
quantitative invariants as volume, Margulis number and diameter in terms of
topological data. This is an area in which connections with topology and several
other branches of mathematics are playing unexpected roles. Classical techniques
in 3-manifold topology, some of which go back to Papakyriakopoulos's work in the
1950s, become particularly powerful when applied in the context of hyperbolic
geometry. These topological ideas interact with more geometric and analytic
methods, such as the log(2k-1) Theorem of Anderson, Canary, Culler and Shalen;
the isoperimetric inequality for hyperbolic space; the theory of algebraic and
geometric convergence of Kleinian groups; the work of Kojima and Miyamoto on
hyperbolic manifolds with totally geodesic boundary; and the work of Agol,
Dunfield, Storm and Thurston which applies properties of the Ricci flow with
surgeries to the study of Haken manifolds and Dehn filling. Furthermore,
surprising interactions are emerging, via topology, between quantitative
geometry of hyperbolic 3-manifolds and their number-theoretic aspects,
specifically their trace fields; this has allowed applications of deep results
in number theory to the subject.

Non-Euclidean geometry is a classical topic in pure mathematics which has seen
remarkable developments in recent decades. The subject had its origin in the
attempt, begun in ancient times, to prove that Euclid's fifth axiom could be
deduced from his other axioms. It was shown in the course of the 19th century
that this cannot be done: there is a mathematical structure called the
hyperbolic plane (in two dimensions) or hyperbolic space (in three or more
dimensions) which satisfies all of Euclid's axioms except the fifth, and in
which the sum of the angles of a triangle is always less than 180 degrees.
Remarkably, hyperbolic geometry turns out to be much richer than Euclidean
geometry. This accounts for the astonishingly varied interactions that have
developed since the 1960's between hyperbolic geometry and other branches of
mathematics and science. Most of these interactions involve the study of
hyperbolic manifolds, which are geometric objects that have the small-scale
geometry of hyperbolic space but have a more complicated structure in the large.
For example, a straight line in hyperbolic space, as in Euclidean space, always
extends to infinity; but in a hyperbolic manifold, a path that is locally a
straight line (called a geodesic) may exhibit globally "periodic" behavior like
a circle. Some of the principal investigators' earliest work on hyperbolic
manifolds produced a result about knots that has been applied to study the
structure of recombinant DNA. They are at present investigating a variety of
aspects of the geometry of hyperbolic manifolds and connections with some of the
other topics mentioned above.
