
* 1207194
* Vortices, Quilts, and Quasimaps
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2012,05/22/2014
* Christopher Woodward,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2017
* USD 436,667.00

The PI will use gauged Floer theory to study non-displaceability of Lagrangian
tori in possibly open symplectic manifolds via compactifications such as
symplectic toric orbifolds, and compare with results of McDuff on
displaceability. With F. Ziltener, his former postdoctoral advisee E. Gonzalez,
and his current student Sushmita Venugopalan the PI will study the quantum
cohomology of quotients and relationships with gauged Gromov-Witten theory. In
particular he will (a) prove a quantum version of Kalkman's wall-crossing
formula which governs the behavior of Gromov-Witten invariants under variation
of symplectic quotient and proves birational equivalence under crepant flops in
many cases, as conjectured by Ruan (b) find presentations of quantum cohomology
rings of symplectic quotients such as toric orbifolds and quiver varieties. With
K. Wehrheim and his former student S. Ma'u the PI will continue to study
holomorphic quilts, functoriality of Lagrangian correspondences in Floer-Fukaya
theory, and relationship with low-dimensional topology. In particular, the PI
will prove the A-infinity version and the exact triangle for fibered Dehn
twists.

These research projects will improve our understanding of symplectic geometry,
which is a mathematical framework for understanding classical mechanics,
particularly for time-dependent energy functions. Many of these projects are
related to the behavior of symplectic invariants under the operation of
symplectic reduction in which the number of degrees of freedom of a system is
reduced by using symmetry. These invariants also appear in the study of quantum-
mechanical ``sigma models'' by physicists, who have made a number or predictions
about their behavior under symplectic reduction, some of which will be verified
and generalized as part of the project. The project on holomorphic quilts will
have applications to our understanding of three- and four-dimensional spaces,
especially invariants constructed using gauge theories which are conjectured
(and in some cases known) to have symplectic interpretations. The PI will also
continue his involvement with middle school mathematics teachers.
