
* 1211652
* Extremal Kahler metrics, the Kahler Ricci flow and the Calabi flow
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2012,09/09/2013
* Xiuxiong Chen,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2016
* USD 357,994.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1211652, Principal Investigator: Xiuxiong Chen

The famous Calabi conjecture states that every Kaehler manifold whose first
Chern class has a definite sign will always have a Kaehler Einstein metric with
appropriate sign on its scalar curvature. This famous conjecture was proved by
S. T. Yau in 1976 when the first Chern class vanishes, and independently by Yau
and Aubin for the case when the first Chern class is negative. When the first
Chern class is positive, the corresponding Calabi conjecture is only solved in
dimension 2, by G. Tian in 1989. The higher dimensional case is largely open
till this day. There are substantial and major progress made in this important
area of mathematics in recent years. We propose to study a network of problems
centered around the existence of extremal Kaehler metrics (a cousin of Kaehler
Einstein metrics), stability of the underlying polarized Kaehler manifolds, and
other related areas . The principal investigator believes that we will see more
breakthrough in near future.

The problem of the existence of extremal Kaehler metrics is the key problem in
differential geometry. It has strong impact to other fields of sciences, in
particular, physics. According to A. Einstein, the theory of gravity can be
interpreted as the geometry of space-time. Thus the research in Kaehler geometry
is crucially important in physics and cosmology. The research proposed also has
impact in string theory, in algebraic geometry as well as nonlinear analysis.
Progress in this proposed problems will be highly interesting to many different
fields.
