
* 1253149
* CAREER: Geometric-Analytic Investigations of Spacetimes and their Nonlinear Phenomena
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 05/15/2013,06/13/2017
* Lydia Bieri,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2019
* USD 410,516.00

This project concerns the investigation of nonlinear partial differential
equations (PDEs), namely the Einstein equations in general relativity, the
geometry of the solution spacetimes and their implications in physics and
astrophysics. One of the main aims of the proposed research is to derive a
complete theory for the nonlinear memory effect of gravitational waves
displacing test masses permanently. This will include answering the questions
whether there exists such an effect for neutrino radiation as present in binary
neutron star mergers and if there is a cosmological memory effect. The goal is
to give a detailed geometric-analytic description in the various scenarios and
to apply the mathematics to experiments. The PI has already made contributions
in this direction in the recent past. The emerging results of the project are
expected to answer fundamental physical questions about gravitational radiation,
the source objects in astrophysics and the very early period of our universe.
Since the pioneering article by D. Christodoulou, where he derived the nonlinear
memory effect (also called the Christodoulou effect), it had been an outstanding
problem if electromagnetic fields coupled to the Einstein equations affect this
nonlinear phenomenon. The PI with collaborators P. Chen and S.-T. Yau solved the
problem, proving that the electromagnetic field in the Einstein-Maxwell (EM)
equations enlarges the Christodoulou effect. Working with Christodoulou's
geometric-analytic approach for the Einstein vacuum equations and N. Zipser's
analysis of the EM equations, the PI, Chen and Yau established novel results and
methods in the geometric analysis of the EM equations. The geometric-analytic
investigations by Christodoulou as well as by the PI with Chen and Yau allowed
the authors to deduce exact solutions describing the related effects precisely
and for all data. In particular, the results hold for large data such as binary
black hole or binary neutron star mergers. Geometric analysis has since proven
to be the most powerful method to tackle these problems. In the study of the
nonlinear memory effect of gravitational waves, null hypersurfaces in Lorentzian
geometry play a crucial role. This is due to the fact that gravitational waves
travel along such null hypersurfaces and experiments are performed at null
infinity. Therefore, the asymptotic behavior of the latter has to be understood.
D. Christodoulou and S. Klainerman in their work "The global nonlinear stability
of the Minkowski space" developed new techniques to investigate those. The PI
generalized their work and established the borderline case from the point of
view of decay of the data. In a research monograph of 300 pages the PI obtained
numerous new results that can be applied to other problems in geometry and
analysis. The main method and its developments have recently led to the solution
of some of the most challenging problems in mathematical physics. The new
project will use new ideas from the PI's recent work and it is expected to yield
further new results in general relativity (GR), geometry and PDE analysis. The
educational component of the proposal focuses on disseminating knowledge of
mathematics, physics and astrophysics as well as historic background to the
public. Aiming at the creation of an exhibit at the Museum of Natural History at
the PI's home University combining geometry and analysis with astrophysics, the
educational project will include student work at undergraduate and graduate
levels. Together with the PI and the museum staff, they will be involved in
teaching at high schools working on the project. At public events organized by
the museum the PI will collaborate with the museum staff to present activities
to enhance learning. Research results will be presented in a simplified way and
adapted to the audience. The project is designed as to reach out to a very broad
public including minority groups, families with small kids, schools at all
levels and will have an appealing component for everyone. Some of the long-
lasting impacts will be new activities for high school classes to teach
mathematics by introducing concepts of physics combined with history and art.

The geometric nature of general relativity singles out geometric analysis to be
the perfect research field to answer the many physical questions. The laws of GR
are the Einstein equations, linking the curvature of spacetime to its matter
content. Exploring these equations will lead to a better understanding of the
universe as a whole and of isolated systems such as galaxies, binary black holes
or binary neutron stars. To unravel the complex interplay between geometry,
analysis and physics is one of the main goals in GR. This project aims to
investigate this beautiful interaction. Along the way, the mathematical tools
developed promise to bear fruit in the analysis of the many structurally similar
nonlinear PDEs. Through the educational component, the PI's research will also
have direct impact in a broader sense via the afore-mentioned activities. The PI
will complement the outreach by attending conferences to communicate her
results. She will also make her results available via internet and publications.
