
* 1264662
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Wall-crossings in Geometry and Physics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2013,04/26/2013
* Denis Auroux,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2017
* USD 264,673.00

This project will investigate wall-crossing formulas for a wide class of
invariants which appear in a priori different situations in mathematics and
physics. Mathematically, those invariants are typically described as virtual
Euler characteristics of some moduli spaces. The wall-crossing phenomenon is
related to the presence of real codimension one "walls" in the space of
parameters, where the invariants jump. In the case of Donaldson-Thomas
invariants, the walls live in the moduli space of Bridgeland stability
conditions on the ppropriate Calabi-Yau categories. Similar walls also occur in
the theory of representations of quivers and cluster algebras. In mirror
symmetry, walls correspond to jumps in the number of pseudo-holomorphic discs
bounded by the torus fibers of an SYZ Lagrangian fibration. In supersymmetric
gauge theories in physics, the number of BPS states jumps across "walls of
marginal stability". The Kontsevich-Soibelman wall-crossing formulas for
Donaldson-Thomas invariants thus occur in the physics literature on topics such
as moduli spaces of vector ultiplets of 4-dimensional supersymmetric theories
and supersymmetric black holes. Since these various wall-crossing formulas look
so similar, one can ask for a common formalism. The aim of the FRG is to study
the underlying "wall-crossing structures" and demonstrate hat the above-
mentioned similarities are not coincidental, but rather reflect a deep
underlying theory.

It is a frequently encountered situation in mathematics and physics that
numerical quantities which in principle depend on various parameters actually
are constant for general parameter values (they are "invariants"), but jump
along certain "walls" in the parameter space. Wall-crossing formulas describe
these "jumps" quantitatively. The subject of wall-crossing has recently become a
very active one due to its relevance to a number of different areas of
mathematics and physics. The aim of this project is to develop the concept of
"wall-crossing structure" rigorously and apply it to problems both old and new
in which wall-crossing formulas appear. The results arising from this project
will be in demand by both the mathematics and physics communities. The FRG will
also build a research community around this coordinated effort, involving a mix
of junior and senior researchers, training opportunities for graduate students,
and the rganization of several workshops.
