
* 1301804
* Cycles, Nonlinear Differential Equations, and Geometric Pluripotential Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2013,05/29/2013
* H. Blaine Lawson,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2017
* USD 322,999.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1301804, Principal Investigator: H. Blaine Lawson

These projects are concerned with the study of cycles, nonlinear partial
differential equations, and geometric generalizations of pluripotential theory.
The first project concerns fully nonlinear differential equations in riemannian
geometry. Recent work of the principal investigator and R. Harvey on the
Dirichlet problem will be continued, and questions concerning singularities and
tangents to solutions will be investigated. Motivation for this study came from
the investigators' development of pluripotential theory in calibrated and other
geometries, where notions of plurisubharmonic functions, pseudo-convex domains,
capacity, etc. were introduced and many basic properties established. This
should have an important impact in calibrated geometry, which in turn plays an
important role in M-theory in modern physics. There should also be applications
to symplectic geometry and to p-convexity in Riemannian geometry. The second
part of the proposal concerns the groups of algebraic cycles and cocycles on a
projective algebraic variety. Here the aim is to understand these groups and
relate them to the global structure of the variety itself. The investigator has,
with others, established a theory of homology type for algebraic varieties based
on the homotopy groups of cycles spaces. This theory will be applied to concrete
questions about algebraic spaces, and implications for real algebraic geometry
will be explored. Striking connections to universal constructions in topology
which emerged in prior research will also be probed. A strongly related part of
the proposal concerns cycles which bound holomorphic chains in projective
manifolds. Characterizations in terms of projective linking numbers and quasi-
plurisubharmonic functions will be studied. This will involve analyzing the
structure of projective hulls, a concept analogous to polynomial hulls, which
has been introduced by the investigator and is of independent interest.
Projective hulls are related to approximation theory, pluripotential theory, and
the spectrum of Banach graded algebras. The final area concerns analytic
approaches to differential characters, and their generalizations, developed by
the PI. The central objects mediate between cycles and smooth data. In the
complex category this involves an analytic study of Deligne cohomology. It
yields invariants for bundles and foliations, and retrieves the classical Abel-
Jacobi mappings. Variational methods will be brought to bear on the study and
connect it to the 1-Laplacian and the theory of minimal hypersurfaces.

A concept of central importance in geometry is that of a "cycle." In algebraic
geometry a cycle corresponds to the simultaneous solution of a system of
polynomial equations. In differential geometry cycles arise in many ways: as the
large scale solutions of certain differential equations, and as the level sets
and singularity sets of differentiable mappings. Curves and surfaces in space
are simple examples. Cycles with a particular geometry (discovered by the
investigator and his collaborators) play a fundamental role in modern physical
theories This project will also be concerned with graduate student development.
Students will be part of the research team. There will also be an undergraduate
educational effort aimed at fostering mathematical independence.
