
* 1306298
* Kahler geometry and canonical metrics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2013,05/29/2013
* Gabor Szekelyhidi,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2017
* USD 131,449.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1306298, Principal Investigator: Gabor Szekelyhidi

The PI's proposed research is concerned with the study of canonical Kahler
metrics on algebraic varieties, in particular the extremal metrics introduced by
Calabi in the 80's. The main conjecture in the field relates the existence of
such metrics to the stability of the variety in the sense of geometric invariant
theory. The proposed research focuses on situations when no extremal metric
exists. On the algebro-geometric side the goal is to construct canonical
degenerations of the variety and the PI's proposal is to use filtrations of the
homogeneous coordinate ring, in analogy with Harder-Narasimhan filtrations of
unstable vector bundles. On the differential geometric side one needs to
understand the possible limiting behavior of families of extremal metrics. In
general this is much more intricate than the much more thoroughly understood
case of Kahler-Einstein metrics, and the PI proposes to first restrict attention
to metrics with bounded curvature, and to relate the limiting behavior to
filtrations. In the proposal a special emphasis is placed on the construction of
new examples of extremal metrics, and the applications of these ideas to other
problems in Kahler geometry.

Geometric partial differential equations govern much of the physical world. For
example solutions of Einstein's equations are intimately related to our
understanding of the universe. The proposed research studies differential
equations related to Einstein's equations and the key question is how the global
structure of a space influences the local, analytic properties, such as
singularities of the solutions of such equations. Understanding this phenomenon
will have applications in physics and the sciences in general.
