
* 1308291
* New analytic techniques in group theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2013,04/10/2015
* David Fisher,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2018
* USD 237,600.00

The main thrust of the proposed research is to introduce and develop new
analytic techniques in group theory and the study of group actions. Major
projects include: (a) studying quasi-isometries using a new notion of coarse
differentiation (introduced in recent joint work with Eskin and Whyte); (b)
developing techniques for studying rigidity of dynamical systems based on
analytic techniques from pde, particularly the theory of wavefront sets; (c)
classifying hyperbolic groups which act smoothly on their boundaries using ideas
from both dynamics and geometric group theory; (d) developing new cohomological
methods in the study of rigidity of group actions. All research lies in the
broad interdisciplinary area of rigidity in dynamics, geometry and topology.
Many proposed projects involve applying analytic ideas and techniques to
problems traditionally studied by dynamical, geometric or topological methods.

In the study of mathematical objects, a key role is often played by the
symmetries of the object - particularly when the object has many symmetries. The
PI investigates ways of characterizing, describing and studying spaces with many
symmetries in various dynamical, geometric and topological settings. These
questions are interdisciplinary in nature and often require learning, adapting
and applying ideas and techniques from many areas of mathematics. The PI's work
has connections with diverse areas of mathematics: from differential equations
(the use of waverfront sets to study fine analytic properties of solutions to
equations) to theoretical computer science (expander graphs, Kazhdan's property
(T) and coarse embedding problems).
