
* 1310604
* The relative Fukaya category and mirror symmetry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2013,07/15/2013
* Nicholas Sheridan,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2016
* USD 158,215.00

The aim of the project is to investigate holomorphic curve invariants of
symplectic manifolds, in particular the Gromov-Witten invariants, symplectic
cohomology, and the Fukaya category. These invariants are of central importance
in symplectic topology, and also have wider applications to low-dimensional
topology (via Heegaard-Floer-type invariants), algebraic geometry (via mirror
symmetry), and string theory. Following the guiding philosophy of Kontsevich's
homological mirror symmetry conjecture, certain relationships between these
invariants are expected, and the main aim of the project is to establish these
relationships, while staying firmly rooted in explicit examples and
computations.

Broadly, the project investigates symplectic manifolds, which are spaces that
locally look like the phase spaces of classical mechanics. Given a symplectic
manifold, one can cook up a variety of interesting structures (called
'invariants'), bearing a strong resemblance to ideas coming from string theory;
in fact, in some sense these invariants describe what physics would look like
for strings living on a space with a symplectic structure. Investigations by
physicists have predicted surprising connections between the physics experienced
by particles living on spaces with a symplectic structure, and that experienced
by particles living on a completely different kind of space: a space with an
algebraic structure. This deep connection between two completely different kinds
of spaces is very surprising, and not at all well-understood. Even so, it is
very useful for mathematicians who study invariants of symplectic manifolds,
because it gives predictions for what they should be in terms of algebraic
geometry, which one can then set about verifying mathematically. The project
aims to follow this strategy to investigate certain kinds of symplectic
invariants, which have a variety of useful applications in different areas of
mathematics and physics.
