
* 1360293
* Gauge Theory and Symplectic Geometry in Dimensions 3 and 4
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/28/2013,09/18/2013
* Cagatay Kutluhan,NY,SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2017
* USD 120,493.00

Gauge theory has played an important role in the study of three- and four-
dimensional manifolds in the last three decades. Investigation of invariants
from gauge theory has revealed many interesting geometric and topological
properties of these manifolds. Meanwhile, pseudo-holomorphic curves in
symplectic geometry have been used to introduce other closely related
invariants. The projects outlined in this proposal are organized into five
topics, each of which exploit the recently proved correspondences between
invariants of three- and four-dimensional manifolds from Seiberg-Witten gauge
theory and symplectic geometry to reveal more about the geometry and topology of
these manifolds. To be more explicit, two of the topics investigate the contact
topology of three-dimensional manifolds and the existence/uniqueness of
symplectic structures on certain types of four-dimensional manifolds. Another
topic concerns the conjectured correspondence between the Seiberg-Witten and
Ozsvath-Szabo invariants of smooth four-dimensional manifolds. The remaining two
topics develop and study Floer homological invariants of knots and three-
dimensional manifolds with boundary from Seiberg-Witten gauge theory and
symplectic geometry, respectively.

Both gauge theory and symplectic geometry have their origins in theoretical
physics, where they are used as mathematical frameworks to describe a classical
or quantum dynamical system. In particular, quantized gauge theory plays a
central role in understanding the dynamics of our universe through what is known
as the standard model. The effort to determine the shape of our universe, which
we perceive as a four-dimensional space--three spatial dimensions and one time
dimension--has over time created a successful collaboration between mathematics
and physics. The study in the abstract setting by mathematicians of these
mathematical frameworks used by physicists not only creates new research
directions in mathematics but also provides new perspectives for physicists to
employ in their research. The research outlined in this proposal aims to
contribute to this collaboration by continuing the study of interactions between
Seiberg-Witten gauge theory and symplectic geometry.
