
* 1401390
* String Math Conferences 2014, June 9-13, 2014
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 05/01/2014,03/01/2018
* Ron Donagi,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2018
* USD 100,000.00

The 2014 String-Math Conference (SMC) will be held at the University of Alberta
in Edmonton, AB, June 9-13, 2014. Additionally, both pre- and post-conference
events will be held in Vancouver, Edmonton, and Banff. The week before SMC 2014,
a String-Math Summer School will be held at the University of British Columbia
in Vancouver, BC. The week following SMC 2014 features two Satellite Workshops
in Alberta: "Calabi-Yau Manifolds and their Moduli" at the University of Alberta
and "Quantum Curves and Quantum Knot Invariants" at the Banff International
Research Station for Mathematical Innovation and Discovery (BIRS). The String-
Math Conferences are a series of large meetings bringing together mathematicians
and physicists who work on ideas related to string theory. The nature of
interactions between mathematicians and physicists has been thoroughly
transformed in recent years. String theory, as well as quantum field theory, has
contributed a series of profound ideas which gave rise to entirely new
mathematical fields and revitalized older ones. By now there is a large and
rapidly growing number of both mathematicians and physicists working at the
string-theoretic interface between the two academic fields. The influence flows
in both directions, with mathematical techniques and ideas contributing
crucially to major advances in string theory.

For mathematics, string theory has been a source of many significant
inspirations, ranging from Seiberg-Witten theory in four-manifolds, to
enumerative geometry and Gromov-Witten theory in algebraic geometry, to work on
the Jones polynomial in knot theory, to advances in symplectic topology, to
recent progress in the geometric Langlands program and the development of
derived algebraic geometry and n-category theory. In the other direction,
mathematics has provided physicists with powerful tools, ranging from powerful
differential geometric techniques for solving or analyzing key partial
differential equations, to toric geometry, to K-theory and derived categories in
D-branes, to the analysis of Calabi-Yau manifolds and string compactifications,
to the use of modular forms and other arithmetic techniques. This mutual
interaction has enhanced the depth, power, and novelty of the results obtained
in both fields. This award provides partial support for travel and lodging to
advanced students and postdoctoral participants. Participation of young
researchers and those from underrepresented groups is actively encouraged. The
results presented at the conference will be disseminated through a conference
web site

https://sites.google.com/a/ualberta.ca/stringmath2014/

and through the Pacific Institute for the Mathematical Sciences online video
archive

www.mathtube.org

which will host video recordings of the talks, slides, and notes.
