
* 1405725
* Differential Equations and the Geometry of Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Jeff Viaclovsky,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2017
* USD 351,310.00

An important motivation for the research of the PI is to understand the
relationship between the geometry and the topology of a space. The latter,
topology, is the study of properties of a space which are invariant under
continuous stretching or bendings of a space, while the former, geometry,
involves understanding distances and is more rigid. For example, the surface of
our planet is a sphere, and one measures distances on it by computing arclengths
of great circles (the Earth is actually an oblate spheroid, but it is very close
to being perfectly spherical). One can imagine deforming the Earth by pushing in
or pulling on small or large regions to warp the geometry. Such a deformation is
less appealing than the familiar round Earth, and there are many ways to make
this notion very precise in terms of minimizing some sort of total energy
measurement. This is directly related to physical principles which say that the
state of a physical system will tend towards a final configuration which
minimizes the total energy. This idea can be generalized to higher-dimensional
objects called manifolds, which are generalized versions of the surface of our
planet. For example, the space that we live in is three-dimensional, and if one
includes time, we are in a four-dimensional universe. In order to understand
these types of higher-dimensional objects, one attempts to find the best way to
measure distances on them which use the least amount of energy, and maximize the
symmetries of the space. The projects in this proposal are to define appropriate
energies on such spaces, and to seek out the important optimal geometries which
minimize the total energy.

In more technical terms, the research of the PI is, broadly speaking, to use
solutions of partial differential equations which are geometric in origin to
study properties of differentiable manifolds. The main areas of concentration of
the PI's research are the existence of critical metrics generalizing the
Einstein condition, the study of quadratic curvature functionals on Riemannian
manifolds, the study of critical ALE metrics and orbifolds, and properties of
moduli spaces of critical metrics. In joint work with Matt Gursky, the PI has
proved existence of critical metrics on various four-manifolds. The proposed
research is to further study the properties of the moduli space of such
solutions. This is related to orbifold compactness theorems previously studied
by Tian-Viaclovsky. The PI has previously demonstrated non-solvability of the
Yamabe problem on certain compact orbifolds, which showed that the orbifold
Yamabe problem is more subtle than in the case of smooth manifolds. The PI
proposes further exploration of this phenomenon, and of connections with the
notion of mass of ALE spaces. There has been a considerable amount of research
on the existence of anti-self-dual metrics on compact manifolds; they have been
shown to exist in abundance. Another goal of the proposal is therefore to
understand global properties of the moduli space in certain cases; especially
for orbifold-cone anti-self-dual metrics. Finally, the PI is committed to
integrating research and education and cultivating intellectual development on
many levels. The PI has been active in outreach and organization of conferences
in the mathematics community.
