
* 1406259
* Ricci Curvature and Geometric Analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2014,06/18/2014
* Aaron Naber,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2017
* USD 197,277.00

The goal of the proposal is to study various geometrically motivated equations
and their applications. The proposal will mostly center around ideas involving
Ricci curvature, however aspects of it will also involve harmonic maps, spectral
analysis, metric-measure spaces, and stochastic analysis. Each of these topics
is somehow concerned with the bending and intrinsic structure of higher
dimensional geometries. In recent years much progress has been made in each of
these areas, but there are a great deal of unknown questions which remain, the
solutions of which would have applications in many branches of mathematics and
physics. In all there are three parts to the proposal with nine projects and
seven coauthors. Each project will discuss first progress expected to be made
over the next year, and then goals past that.

The first part of the proposal centers on studying the connections between Ricci
curvature and the infinite dimensional analysis on path space. Recent
breakthroughs have allowed researchers to realize that the two are intimately
connected, and the hope is that further understanding in this area should open
up new areas of research as well as solve many questions involving spaces with
bounded Ricci curvature. There are two projects in this part of the proposal.
The second part of the paper focuses on the regularity of manifolds with lower
and bounded Ricci curvature. In particular, together with several co-authors the
projects include the proving of new epsilon-regularity theorems for Einstein
manifolds and showing that metric-measure spaces with lower Ricci curvature
bounds are rectifiable. There are three projects in the second part of the
proposal. The final part of the proposal includes four projects from various
areas of geometric analysis. This includes a project in the very classical topic
of elliptic equations on Euclidean space. It is surprising, but there are still
many open questions in this area. In particular, the project focuses on the
study of critical sets of such equations under very rough coefficients.
