
* 1406614
* Ninety-Nine Years of General Relativity: ESI-EMS-IAMP Summer School on Global Aspects of Mathematical Relativity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 04/01/2014,02/26/2014
* Justin Corvino,PA,Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Ricardo Castano-Bernard
* 03/31/2015
* USD 34,000.00

A summer school, Ninety-Nine Years of General Relativity, will be held at the
Erwin Schrödinger Institute (Vienna, Austria), July 28-August 1, 2014. This
summer school will examine topics in geometric analysis (differential geometry,
partial differential equations) of current interest in mathematical general
relativity. The Einstein equation is of fundamental importance in general
relativity and Riemannian geometry, and the study of the Einstein equation as a
model for gravitational phenomena involves deep relationships between geometric
analysis and physics. Spectacular progress has been made in recent years on
several fronts, including the study of wave equations on black hole space-times
(with the eventual goal of understanding black hole stability), cosmic
censorship, dynamical formation of black holes in vacuum, topology of black
holes, and a better understanding of the moduli space of solutions to the
Einstein constraint equations which govern geometry of initial data for the
Cauchy problem. Recent advances in numerical analysis of gravitational phenomena
highlight the need to push the theoretical boundaries of the initial value
formulation (both in constructing solutions to the constraints and in
understanding the evolution of these initial data sets) and to create a bridge
between the researchers in these areas. The purpose of the summer school is to
introduce graduate students and postdocs to the background needed to approach
these results and to frame some outstanding open problems in the field. The
program will consist of four mini-courses supplemented by several hours of
lectures on both introductory and special topics. Details are available at the
summer school webpage:
http://homepage.univie.ac.at/piotr.chrusciel/SummerSchool2014/index.html

There exists around the world a vibrant community of mathematicians and
physicists who are making progress on mathematical relativity. Astrophysical
observations and the search for gravitational waves continue to provide
researchers with both theoretical and experimental challenges. The summer school
Ninety-Nine Years of General Relativity will introduce graduate students and
postdocs to the tools needed to approach these and other outstanding problems in
the field. The school will also foster interaction amongst established
researchers, graduate students and postdocs, from the U.S., Europe and
elsewhere. It is of crucial importance to recruit and support young talent in
the field and, in particular, to bring together students and researchers whose
interests span the theoretical to the applied, from geometric analysis to
astrophysics and numerical analysis. The grant will provide funding for fifteen
U.S. graduate students and postdocs to attend the summer school.
