
* 1406164
* Nonlinear PDEs and complex geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2014,06/18/2014
* Benjamin Weinkove,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2018
* USD 185,307.00

Many of the laws of physics, such as the Einstein field equations, are described
using nonlinear differential equations on geometric spaces. Geometric analysts
use nonlinear differential equations to try to classify and understand the
possible structures that can occur in geometric spaces. An equation known as the
Ricci flow has been used to great success to show that every three dimensional
space can be cut up into pieces, each of which has a well-understood geometry.
The Ricci flow works by evolving a metric, which defines a notion of distance
between two points, by a nonlinear heat flow process. However, for spaces of
dimension four or higher (such as the space-time we live in), this process is
not yet well understood. A major goal of this project is to investigate
nonlinear equations on spaces of dimension four and higher with the aim of
classifying these spaces and understanding the natural geometric structures that
live on them. This project focuses on spaces endowed with a 'complex structure'.
Despite the name, spaces with complex structures are easier to study, since this
additional structure limits the kinds of singularities that could occur. Complex
geometries appear in physical theories, such as string theory. This project will
investigate complex geometries in four dimensions, using a new heat flow
equation known as the Chern-Ricci flow. In higher dimensions, an equation
analogous to the Calabi-Yau equation (much studied in string theory) will be
used to investigate the structure of these spaces.

This project will investigate nonlinear PDEs in complex geometry, with a focus
on spaces which are non-Kahler. The PI will build on results for the Kahler-
Ricci flow on complex surfaces to understand the behavior of the Chern-Ricci
flow, a PDE which makes sense even in the non-Kahler case. This project will
investigate the behavior of the Chern-Ricci flow in relation to the
classification of complex surfaces. In particular, the PI will study how
exceptional curves are contracted by this flow, and how the flow behaves on
Class VII surfaces. For higher dimensional non-Kahler complex manifolds, the PI
will use the complex Monge-Ampere equation to study questions about cohomology
and existence of Kahler currents. In addition, the PI will study a new Monge-
Ampere equation for (n-1)-plurisubharmonic functions, which is related to
Gauduchon and balanced metrics on complex manifolds. A solution to this new
equation will solve a long-standing conjecture of Gauduchon and have possible
applications to deformation problems for projective varieties. Finally, the PI
intends to extend these ideas to a Monge-Ampere type equation of Donaldson on
symplectic 4-manifolds with compatible almost complex structures. A conjecture
of Donaldson on existence of solutions to this equation can be reduced to a
second order estimate. If this estimate holds it would give applications to the
symplectic topology of 4-manifolds.
