
* 1406209
* Stability and Instability in Topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Benson Farb,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2019
* USD 576,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1406209, Principal Investigator: Benson Farb

The principal investigator proposes a program of research, education and
outreach that is meant to have a maximal impact at all levels. The general
research project of the principal investigator involves the topological
structure of so-called "locally symmetric spaces." These spaces appear
throughout mathematics and physics, and encode deep, complicated and applicable
information. The principal investigator and his collaborators have found a new
pattern that occurs in these spaces, and they have built a conjectural picture
of other patterns that should exist. The principal will continue to engage with
students at all levels, from PhD to undergraduate to K-12. This outreach
includes in particular the training of a number of students from under-
represented groups. It also includes public outreach, communicating of the power
of mathematics and science, and how it impacts our daily lives, via public
lectures.

In more technical terms, the principal investgiator proposes work with A. Putman
and T. Church to expose new phenomena and introduce new methods to the study of
the cohomology of arithmetic groups. These methods are meant to show, in
particular, that the top-dimensional cohomology of certain arithmetic groups
over rings of integers in a number field vanishes rationally when the number
field has class number one, and otherwise has exponentially growing (in
dimension) cohomology, with growth rate depending explicitly on class number.
This work is part of a broader conjectural picture of low-codimension cohomology
of arithmetic groups, made by the PI with Church and Putman.
