
* 1454342
* CAREER: Periodic Orbits of Hamiltonian Diffeomorphisms and Reeb Flows
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/15/2015,09/01/2022
* Basak Gurel,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Hamiltonian systems constitute a broad class of mechanical systems where energy
dissipation can be neglected. For example, the planetary motion in celestial
mechanics, the flow of an incompressible ideal fluid, and the motion of a
charged particle in an electro-magnetic field are usually treated as Hamiltonian
dynamical systems. One of the most important questions concerning the dynamics
of such systems and connected to many other branches of mathematics and physics
is the existence of periodic orbits. Corresponding to cyclic motion, this is the
simplest dynamical phenomenon after equilibrium, and an investigation of
periodic orbits of a system is crucial in understanding its global behavior. To
give but a few applications, the knowledge of periodic orbits is crucial in
astronomy, particle accelerators, and fluid dynamics or can be used to
understand stability of solutions for large times. Hamiltonian systems tend to
have numerous periodic orbits, but proving the existence of even one closed
orbit often requires advanced and powerful mathematical tools. This research
project aims at establishing the existence of infinitely many periodic orbits
for a broad class of Hamiltonian systems and analyzing the systems that fall
outside this class, and the work will advance our understanding of the dynamics
of conservative systems and result in the development of new powerful techniques
applicable to other questions. Many of the systems considered in the proposal
(e.g., magnetic flows) are of interest in physics and engineering, and some of
the projects are expected to have applications in mathematical physics,
geometric mechanics, and other areas.

The research program focuses on the question of the existence of infinitely many
periodic orbits for Hamiltonian dynamical systems in a variety of settings and
on new methods to investigate this question that are currently being developed
by the PI. The research comprises several interconnected projects addressing
various aspects of this question for certain classes of Hamiltonian
diffeomorphisms and Reeb flows and also for specific Hamiltonian systems such as
magnetic flows. The project also opens up new research directions such as the
study of non-contractible periodic orbits on closed manifolds. The PI will
tackle these problems employing symplectic topological methods including Floer
and quantum homological techniques, contact and symplectic homology,
J-holomorphic curves, and spectral invariants, and will continue to develop new
Floer theoretic techniques tailored for the study of periodic orbits. The
projects have applications to other questions of interest in symplectic and
contact dynamics and topology, classical dynamical systems, and Riemannian
geometry.
