
* 1454854
* CAREER: Geometric flows and four-dimensional geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2015,06/03/2022
* Jeffrey Streets,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 10/31/2022
* USD 515,329.00

This grant will support a multifaceted and interconnected program of education
and research aiming at significant results in both areas. The research goals
center around a deeper understanding of the behavior of natural evolution
processes arising in physics and geometry. Central examples are the equations
governing the evolution of soap bubbles and thin films. A thorough understanding
of these equations requires incorporating techniques from physics, analysis, and
geometry, and results in a deeper understanding of all of those areas. Aiming at
the long term fulfillment of these research goals, we will enact a number of
educational activities. These include outreach activities to recruit local high
school and community college students into the UC system, opportunities for
undergraduates to gain research experience in this area of mathematics, and
programs aimed at graduate-level education and training in both research and
teaching activities. This project will directly support the NSF goals of
maintaining a position of leadership in mathematics research as well as
supporting excellence in mathematics education.

One of the central themes in geometry is to understand the interplay between the
topology and geometry of manifolds, and geometric flows have proven to be
powerful tools in understanding this relationship. Despite striking results in
three dimensions, Ricci flow alone may not be enough to understand the geometry
of four-manifolds. This project centers around a deeper understanding of the
long term behavior, singularity formation, and geometric content of certain
generalizations of Ricci flow, with a focus on understanding aspects of complex
geometry and four-dimensional geometry. We will use a variety of techniques from
PDE and geometry to understand these flows, in conjunction with the goal of
training students at all levels. These equations appear quite naturally in
physical contexts, so progress on the questions outlined in this proposal would
yield insights and have impact beyond geometry, specifically to understanding
PDE, complex geometry, and mathematical physics. Moreover, these equations,
while already worthy of study in their own right, in principle have the
potential to address long standing conjectures in topology and geometry. Aiming
at the long term fulfillment of these research goals, we will enact a number of
educational activities. We will pursue a robust program of graduate student
training involving the development of novel courses, learning seminars, and the
development of research projects. We also will create a "Future Faculty Program"
aimed at training graduate students as future teachers. Building on the success
of the Southern California Geometric Analysis Seminar, we will initiate a one-
week minicourse for graduate students preceding the conference as well as a
poster session for graduate students and postdocs accompanying the conference.
Moreover, we will enact a series of recruitment days designed to foster
interaction between UC Irvine undergraduates and graduate students and local
high school and community college students, with the goal of aiding transfer
into the UC system and other four-year institutions.
