
* 1506652
* Geometric PDEs and Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2015,05/22/2015
* Tristan Collins,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2018
* USD 128,224.00

Geometric partial differential equations are ubiquitous in the study of natural
physical phenomena-- for example, Einstein's equations in general relativity,
and Maxwell's equations in electrodynamics. In practice these equations do not
always admit a solution. Understanding the properties of spaces in which these
equations have solutions, and furthermore understanding precisely the
obstructions to finding solutions sheds new light on the underlying structure of
the universe. A thorough understanding of the obstructions to solving these
natural equations can lead to new and exciting predictions in the fields of
string theory and high energy physics.

The PI proposes to investigate several problems concerning the geometry of
Kahler manifolds using techniques from partial differential equations and
algebraic geometry. The central theme of this research is to relate the
convergence or singularity formation of several geometric heat flows, such as
the Kahler-Ricci flow and the J-flow, to algebraic geometry. In the setting of
the Kahler-Ricci flow it is essential to understand the algebro-geometric
properties of the blow-up set for the flow at any finite time singularity. In
the non-projective setting, this involves finding transcendental approaches to
algebro-geometric problems-- for example, Kawamata's base point free theorem. In
the setting of the J-flow, the convergence or singularity formation of the flow
is expected to be determined by an algebro-geometric stability condition. The PI
aims to investigate how this stability condition is related to the analytic
behavior of the flow for large time both in specific examples, and in general.
