
* 1508207
* Contact Geometry of Links of Singularities and Affine Varieties
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2015,09/05/2017
* Mark McLean,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2019
* USD 176,677.00

The aim of this project is to start a program establishing a connection between
two different areas of geometry. The first area is called symplectic geometry
and the second area is called algebraic geometry. Symplectic geometry involves
the study of classical physical systems, for instance pendulums, moving
particles, other devices with possibly many moving parts. It gives a nice way of
describing the position and velocity of these systems in a unified way.
Algebraic geometry is the study of solutions of certain fundamental equations
called polynomial equations. These equations are used in many areas of
mathematics, and even outside of mathematics, such as physics and computer
science. The solutions to these equations have a shape, which in some places is
a nice smooth object, but also can have regions which are not smooth called
singular points. In this project, we explore a deep relationship between these
singular points and certain families of classical physical systems. Many
properties of singularities have corresponding purely dynamical interpretations
in these physical systems which will be explored further as very little is
currently known. The study of singularities is especially important in algebraic
geometry at the moment due to recent advances in an program called the minimal
model program. Part of this project also involves teaching graduate students how
to use various fundamental tools from symplectic geometry. Such tools are
featured in this program. The primary aim of this project is to understand the
relationship between symplectic/contact geometry and affine algebraic geometry.
This relationship will be studied using pseudo-holomorphic methods that were
originally introduced by Gromov and have now developed into important tools such
as Gromov-Witten invariants, Floer homology, and Symplectic Field Theory.
Mumford gave us a criterion to tell us when a complex surface is smooth at a
particular point or not from its link. The PI proved a higher dimensional
version of Mumford's result where the link now has a natural contact structure.
Part of the aim of this proposal is to start a program relating the algebraic
properties of higher dimensional singularities with their links as contact
manifolds in the same way that Mumford's paper did so for surface singularities.
Much of this work is also directly related to recent advances in the minimal
model program. As a starting point we hope to generalize at least parts of a
result by Neumann giving us the topology of a resolution from the link. In a
related project, we hope to understand the McKay correspondence for quotient
singularities with crepant resolutions using Floer theoretic ideas. This might
lead us to extend this correspondence to quotient singularities that do not have
crepant resolutions, and even to more general singularities. The PI will give
many examples of contact manifolds not contactomorphic to links of
singularities. The PI will also look at affine varieties from a symplectic
perspective by trying to understand how properties such as log Kodaira dimension
and rational connectedness relate to the symplectic structure. This project also
involves teaching graduate students how to apply pseudo-holomorphic methods in
various situations.
