
* 1518420
* CAREER: Symplectic and spectral theory of integrable systems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2014,06/03/2015
* Alvaro Pelayo,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2018
* USD 239,705.00

The Faculty Early Career Development Award (CAREER) will support Alvaro Pelayo's
research at the intersection of dynamical systems, spectral theory and
symplectic geometry. More specifically, the CAREER Award will fund Pelayo's
investigations on classical and quantum semitoric systems. A classical semitoric
system is an integrable Hamiltonian system with two degrees of freedom for which
one component generates a periodic flow. For mathematicians, semitoric systems
form the next natural class of systems after toric systems. Semitoric systems
retain some properties of toric systems, while at the same time they exhibit a
much greater flexibility. This flexibility is reflected in the existence of
singularities which are dynamically and symplectically rich.Semitoric systems
are commonly found in simple physical models and arise naturally as examples in
analysis, partial differential equations, algebraic geometry and symplectic
geometry. As a matter of fact, a semitoric system defines a singular toric
fibration whose base comes endowed with a singular integral affine structure.
These singular affine structures are a central concept in symplectic topology
and mirror symmetry. A semitoric quantum system is given by two commuting self-
adjoint semiclassical operators acting on a Hilbert space whose principal
symbols form a classical semitoric system. One of Pelayo's main goals is to
study the spectral theory of semitoric quantum systems and how it relates to
classical systems. Concretely, Pelayo's plan is to work towards verifying that
the semiclassical joint spectrum of a quantum semitoric system determines
completely the system; this is the Spectral Conjecture, widely considered the
most spectacular problem in the area. Proving this conjecture requires
establishing a number of results in semiclassical analysis, giving a tool for
future research in the field, independent of the conjecture. Another component
of Pelayo's research plans is to continue studying semitoric systems in a more
general context, in particular as it regards to the study of the convexity and
connectivity properties of the singular Lagrangian fibrations which semitoric
systems induce, and which are of special interest in mirror symmetry.

The research that the CAREER Award will support belongs to the context of
dynamics and geometry. Dynamics is the study of the motion of bodies. Geometry
is the study of shape (broadly understood) of objects and spaces.More
specifically, the CAREER Award will support Pelayo's research at the
intersection of symplectic geometry, spectral theory and dynamics. Symplectic
geometry has its roots in physics, and provides an appropriate mathematical
framework to study many problems of physics and chemistry and their quantum
counterparts. Pelayo's research on this topic exhibits the interplay between
mathematical and physical theories. Indeed, several groups of physicists and
chemists working on modern quantum spectroscopy have been interested in seeing
how mathematical methods can contribute to advance their research, and predict
new physical phenomena. They have been particularly interested in understanding
the global structure of joint energy-momentum spectra of small molecules. Even
more, they have recognized the pivotal role that mathematical invariants play in
this problem. Their works have motivated a large number of mathematical
questions. The physicists have asked whether one can single out an optimal set
of mathematical invariants that would characterize a physical system and then
detect these invariants in the spectrum of the system. The detection of the
invariants in the system spectrum will allow us to reconstruct the system and
hence predict new phenomena. The CAREER Award will support Pelayo's
investigations into this crucial question. These applications to quantum
molecular spectroscopy are integrated in Pelayo's approach of employing methods
from pure mathematics (symplectic and spectral theory, microlocal analysis) to
address problems from the applied sciences. More generally, Pelayo's research is
focused on a fundamental type of physical system, the so called integrable
systems. One can find direct applications of integrable systems in numerous
contexts. Some such examples are nonlinear control, locomotion generation in
robotics, elasticity theory, plasma physics, field theory and planetary mission
design. In order to communicate this relevance of mathematical research to the
general public, Pelayo has been interviewed on several occasions by the press
(radio and magazines with several hundred thousand audience members). He has
commented and advocated for an understanding of the leading role that
mathematicians play in the advance of applied science and technology in society.
Pelayo will continue actively reaching out to the general public during the
tenure of the award, and will continue to take a leading role at Washington
University outreach programs. In this respect he will run a Talent
Identification Program at Washington University to encourage and nurture
undergraduate research at an early stage.
