
* 1540379
* Differential Geometry and Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 10/01/2014,04/16/2015
* Richard Schoen,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2017
* USD 242,863.00

One aspect of the proposed research has to do with optimal shapes of surfaces.
If we think of the surface as a drumhead which vibrates freely at certain
frequencies, then, roughly speaking, the more complicated a geometry we have the
smaller its fundamental frequencies will be. This suggests the problem of
looking for geometries which maximize the fundamental frequency for their area.
This extremal question is a difficult and much studied problem. It turns out
that the geometries which arise are related to surfaces of least area (soap
films). The proposer will investigate such extremal configurations for surfaces
with boundary. The other main area of investigation concerns the Einstein
equations of general relativity. These equations describe the gravitational
field for massive bodies in the universe. The theory is purely geometric and is
a wave theory with an initial value formulation. The proposer is planning to
investigate the geometry of solutions to give conditions under which
gravitational collapse takes place and black holes are formed. Such questions
lead to important geometric questions involving gravitational energy and
curvature of spacetime.

The proposed research is at the interface between differential geometry, general
relativity, and partial differential equations. A main theme of the research in
geometry will be the study of spectral geometry. The PI plans to construct
metrics on surfaces and certain higher dimensional manifolds subject to an area
or boundary length constraint which maximize the first eigenvalue. This is a
nonstandard type of variational problem since it involves maximizing and
minimizing over infinite dimensional spaces of competitors. The PI will study
the geometry of such maximizing metrics to determine the optimal shapes with
largest fundamental frequency. In relativity, the PI intends to continue his
investigations into the construction proposed by Bartnik of mass minimizing
extensions of compact domains and static vacuum metrics. The PI also intends to
study geometric properties of initial data sets concerning the question of
whether they can contain non-compact stable trapped surfaces. Finally the PI
intends to investigate global properties of the moduli space of solutions of the
constraint equations which define the possible initial data for the Einstein
equations. The PI shall pursue a range of questions concerning minimal
submanifolds satisfying free boundary conditions and connections to eigenvalue
problems. Finally the PI plans to continue his study of minimal lagrangian and
special lagrangian submanifolds of Kahler-Einstein manifolds. The research will
attempt to prove a conjecture concerning the invariance of the subgroup of the
integral homology of a Calabi-Yau manifold which is generated by minimal
lagrangian cycles when one deforms the ambient Calabi-Yau structure.
