
* 1607512
* Geometry and Dynamics in Low Dimensional Topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2016,05/20/2016
* Howard Masur,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2021
* USD 203,000.00

A major role of mathematics is to provide a framework or language for scientific
research. This mathematical research project centers on the concept of shapes
and their evolution, a fundamental object of study in many parts of science.
Examples range from the shapes of complicated molecules, such as proteins and
enzymes, to the configurations of the solar system. In mathematics, Teichmueller
theory is the study of the shapes that a surface can assume. In this project,
surfaces, their geodesics (shortest paths), and their evolution will be studied
in two different settings. In the first, the surfaces have a geometry in which
they are flat and so have zero curvature. In the second, the surfaces have
negative curvature. Results of the project will deepen and extend understanding
in geometry and topology.

This project addresses questions in a wide spectrum of mathematics, including
the fields of complex analysis, dynamical systems, geometry, and topology.
Important examples of dynamical systems are interval exchange transformations
and flows on translation surfaces. Important aspects of these dynamical systems
are ergodicity and counting problems. The properties of an individual
translation surface are intimately related to the study of the moduli space of
all translation surfaces. The project concerns questions in both these subjects.
The investigator plans to continue study of the mixing properties of the Weil-
Petersson geodesic flow on the moduli space of Riemann surfaces. Knowledge of
this flow will greatly expand our understanding of the geometry of Riemann
surfaces. A fundamental object in topology and geometry is the mapping class
group of a surface; the project aims to further understanding by studying the
lattice counting problem for the mapping class group acting on Teichmueller
space.
