
* 1610202
* Stability of variational problems in differential geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2016,04/27/2016
* Tamas Darvas,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 01/31/2020
* USD 142,328.00

The principle of least action says that the outcome of a physical model should
always minimize a well-determined physical quantity, the action functional. This
observation goes back to Fermat and Euler, and broadly speaking it says that, by
the laws of nature, things are carried out in the most economical way. The
phenomenon applies to many facets of physics, including Newtonian, Lagrangian
and Hamiltonian mechanics, even general relativity. The abstract mathematical
framework that studies such phenomena is the calculus of variations, and the
principal investigator will apply this in the context of differential geometry.
Namely, in differential geometry one often has a large collection of geometric
objects (in this case Kahler metrics or Lagrangians) and is searching for
special elements in this collection that have the nicest properties. These
special elements often minimize a certain energy functional, and this is the
starting point of the project. A thorough understanding of the problems at hand
can lead to new insight into the shape of the universe, and it would help make
exciting predictions in string theory and, more broadly, in theoretical physics.

This project can be split into three main subjects: characterizing existence of
constant scalar curvature metrics on Kahler manifolds; convexity and curvature
properties of the L^p-Finsler geometry of the space of Kahler metrics, their
finite dimensional approximations, and the structure of the associated space of
geodesic rays; the metric structure of the space of positive Lagrangians. As a
novelty, in the proposed study we will either specifically develop or use an
adequate metric geometry, in hopes of understanding the underlying variational
problems better. The metric spaces that the PI plans to use arise from the path
length structure of infinite dimensional Finsler manifolds, and as such have a
very rich geometry themselves. In the Kahler case it is hopeful that this will
allow one to connect many notions of stability, including K-stability from the
Yau-Tian-Donaldson conjecture, the energy properness of Tian, and geodesic
stability, all conjectured to characterize existence of constant scalar
curvature metrics. In the case of Lagrangian geometry much less is known.
Following a recent program proposed by Solomon, the principal investigator
intends to develop the underlying metric geometry further in order to formulate
and prove stability conditions characterizing existence of special Lagrangians.
