
* 1611745
* Positivity in Complex Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2016,07/23/2021
* Damin Wu,CT,University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 223,400.00

This project studies fundamental problems on the characterization of positivity
in complex geometry. Complex geometry is a branch of geometry that concerns
objects defined over the complex number field. The positivity implies the
existence of plenty of global objects called holomorphic sections, which play a
central role in geometry. The research will develop and bring in techniques from
different fields including differential geometry, algebraic geometry, and
nonlinear partial differential equations. Some of the answers will shed light on
the deep connection between the complex geometric structure and algebraic
structure. The proposal will also generate appropriate research problems for
graduate students and junior researchers.

Positivity of canonical bundles in complex geometry gives rise to intriguing
connections between complex geometry, nonlinear partial differential equations,
and algebraic geometry. The PI will undertake three research projects to better
understand the positivity of canonical bundles from a differential geometric
approach using holomorphic curvature, Kahler-Einstein metrics, and the complex
Monge-Ampere equation. A class of fully nonlinear equations generalizing the
complex Monge-Ampere equation will be also investigated. The first project will
study the positivity of canonical bundles by holomorphic curvature,
hyperbolicity, and the Bergman metric. The second project will investigate the
asymptotic expansion of the canonical metric on the positive logarithmic
canonical bundle. The third project seeks to establish a Liouville-type theorem
for some fully-nonlinear equations.
