
* 1612015
* Geometric Analysis in Conformal Geometry and Fully Nonlinear Elliptic Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2016,08/24/2016
* Yi Wang,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 180,533.00

The principal investigator's research interest lies at the intersection of
conformal geometry and partial differential equations. Conformal geometry is the
study of the set of angle-preserving transformations on a space. One focus will
be on so-called conformal invariants, which form an important machinery from
physicists' point of view and have deep connection to fundamental principles in
general relativity. The mass concentration, a phenomenon that has widely
appeared in biological and physical sciences, will also be at the center of the
investigation. One of the main goals will be to connect different subfields in
differential geometry. The generalization will significantly enlarge the scope
of the applications.

The project research aims to understand basic questions in conformal geometry by
using partial differential equations. This includes problems of constructing and
classifying conformal invariants, which originated from mathematical physics. It
also includes studying the relationship between conformal invariants and other
geometric quantities, and establishing geometric inequalities. The PI intends to
develop weight theory in order to refine the analytic study of conformal
invariants. She will also investigate global rigidity associated to extrinsic
curvatures of higher orders on submanifolds.
