
* 1711317
* Momentum Maps in Symplectic, Algebraic, and Discrete Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2017,07/27/2021
* Tara Holm,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2021
* USD 192,339.00

Symplectic geometry is a broad and deep subject, with foundations in
mathematical physics, that has seen much activity over the last two decades.
Symplectic manifolds are spaces that carry a basic geometric structure which
assigns an area to each two-dimensional plane. Because symplectic manifolds all
locally `look the same', distinguishing two of them involves global properties
and measurements, such as how large a ball can be embedded into the space in an
area-preserving way (this is an example of a symplectic capacity). Fortunately,
many symplectic manifolds have built-in symmetries, and the main focus in this
project is the role of symmetries in symplectic geometry (especially, those
symmetries that are organized into Hamiltonian group actions) and the quotient
spaces that result when the symmetries are used to 'fold up' the manifold. A key
tool in studying these symmetries is the momentum map, and in this project the
PI will achieve a deeper understanding of the relationship between the geometry
of a Hamiltonian system and the combinatorics of the momentum image. More
broadly, the activities supported by this award will advance our knowledge in
the fields of symplectic geometry and combinatorics, with applications to
algebraic geometry, algebraic topology and mathematical physics.  The PI will
also continue to train graduate students and mentor postdocs at Cornell, as well
as continue activities which have a substantial impact on the broader
mathematical community and society as large, such as giving public lectures
describing `big ideas' from geometry and topology, and playing significant
leadership roles in professional organizations and groups that seek to improve
undergraduate mathematics education across the nation.

As mentioned above, Hamiltonian group actions give rise to the momentum
map. This allows us to construct the symplectic reduction, which can also be
described algebraically using geometric invariant theory. Pseudoholomorphic
curves provide strong analytic tools to study symplectic invariants. A
particularly nice package for using these tools is Hutchings' embedded contact
homology (ECH). A  fundamental problem in symplectic geometry is to relate the
geometry and topology of a Hamiltonian system to the combinatorics of the
momentum polytope, and vice versa.  In the projects supported by this award, the
PI will study questions about symplectic embedding problems, including
symplectic capacities of toric 4-manifolds and rational ruled surfaces using ECH
capacities. The PI's analysis will add to our understanding of topological
invariants in equivariant symplectic geometry, including building a surjectivity
and formality package for symplectic quotients, and a study of complexity one
spaces. She is also writing a graduate textbook  introducing students and
researchers to the key aspects of the field. Finally, the PI will address a
number of questions in computational toric topology.  The answers will rely on
tools from  a variety of fields, including algebraic  geometry, commutative
algebra, and algebraic topology. This set of projects includes the study of
toric folded symplectic manifolds, a close cousin of symplectic toric manifolds,
and  questions about ordinary and stringy invariants of toric orbifolds.
