
* 1745517
* Ends of Einstein Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2016,07/18/2018
* Hans-Joachim Hein,NY,Fordham University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2020
* USD 125,020.00

An Einstein manifold is a Riemannian manifold of constant Ricci curvature. This
means that we have a space permeated by a physical field governed by a certain
system of nonlinear partial differential equations, closely related to but
subtly different from how the gravitational field in Einstein's theory of
General Relativity permeates spacetime. Independent of their origin in physics,
Einstein manifolds are beautiful mathematical objects in their own right whose
study links together many disparate areas of mathematics. The space underlying
an Einstein manifold usually has dimension 4 or higher, which makes it difficult
to visualize such structures. However, Einstein manifolds in dimension 4 share
many basic features with minimal surfaces in dimension 2, which have been a
staple of mathematical research and popularization for decades.

It is a key feature of nonlinear partial differential equations that solutions
may form singularities and break down at points of infinite physical field
strength. An "end" of an Einstein manifold is a neighborhood of such a
singularity in space. The aim of this project is to advance our understanding of
these ends in two complementary ways: by constructing new examples with
unexpected properties, and by proving classification theorems to narrow down the
range of possible phenomena. On the examples side, this will include the
construction of Einstein metrics with isolated singularities not homeomorphic to
their tangent cones, Einstein metrics with complex hyperbolic cusp ends,
Einstein metrics interpolating between different Ricci-flat cones, and Einstein
manifolds of unbounded topology. On the classification side, the main goal is to
resolve open questions in the theory of gravitational instantons (complete
hyper-Kahler manifolds of real dimension 4), by further developing a
compactification technique recently introduced by the PI and his coauthors.
