
* 1745329
* Midwest Geometry Conference 2017
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2017,08/01/2017
* David Auckly,KS,Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2018
* USD 19,983.00

The 2017 Midwest Geometry Conference will take place at Kansas State University
in Manhattan, KS. on November 17 - 19, 2017. It will bring together geometers
and geometrical analysts from the Midwest and beyond to share ideas and recent
results. Geometric analysis is an area of mathematics that study geometric
quantities via changes in the quantities. For example, the shape of a water
droplet may be determined by thinking about the way deforming the side of the
drop would change the forces on the side of the drop. Workshops are an
especially effective way to encourage and produce research in this field.
Research is often performed by collaborators and a workshop gives collaborators
time to work, and allows new collaborations to form.

Speakers and participants at the workshop work on gluing results for minimal
surfaces, the Einstein constraint equations and curvature flows. Capillary
surfaces may be represented as well. Isometric group actions and spaces with
curvature bounded from below will also be represented. It has been a while since
gauge theory was represented at the conference, but with new faculty working in
geometric topology moving into the region, it is reasonable to expect more gauge
theory and Floer theory at future workshops. The website for the workshop is:
https://www.math.ksu.edu/events/conference/2017_Midwest_Geometry.html
