
* 1811071
* Research in Geometric and Quantitative Topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2018,07/19/2018
* Shmuel Weinberger,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2021
* USD 256,359.00

Topology is usually thought of as a qualitative form of geometry. This
flexibility is important for the role it plays in other areas in being able to
deal with somewhat noisy or imprecise data, and reason rigorously about it. For
many purposes, however, one wants to know how large or complex topological
constructions are, and how stable solutions are to perturbations. This requires,
technically, that one studies not just nonlinear functions from one space to
another, but also spaces that bound measurements (such as the size of
derivatives) on the functions. This mixed analytic topological study will be at
the core of the project, with applications to geometric complexity, to spaces
with singularities, which benefit from such study, but also require additional
geometric and algebraic tools. Application to problems of numerical computation
with natural resource bounds is anticipated

In more detail, this project will study the complexity measured in terms of
Lipschitz constants and bi-Lipschitz constants of homotopies, embeddings,
immersions and (volumes for) cobordisms in smooth and PL settings. In some sense
this should have the same relation to usual geometric topology as theoretical
computer science has to logic. Indeed, using undecidability results, one can
prove lower complexity bounds (as in Nabutovsky's ICM talk), but much homotopy
theory, especially stable homotopy theory are decidable, but not effectively so
(following Brown). The new information can be thought of as providing geometric
information about function spaces of Lipschitz maps, showing that they have some
bounds on diameter that are quite striking in comparison to the much larger
estimates (that underly approximation theory, and some learning theory) for
their volumes (also known as entropy, or covering numbers). Besides the
intrinsic interest in these questions, they also bear on variational problems
and perhaps on computation (as in, for example, the Blum-Shub-Smale model).
Earlier variants of these quantitative concerns have already arisen in the study
of square integrable cohomology and controlled (and bounded) topology. These
theories will continue to be studied, hopefully revealing more subtle
refinements of the Borel/Baum-Connes conjectures in special cases (such as
virtually solvable groups) and applications to understanding group actions on
aspherical manifolds. Interestingly, although there is currently no known
quantitative bound at all on the number of embeddings of one manifold in another
in codimension at least three, finiteness is known (for any Bi-Lipschitz bound),
there is a natural strategy combining controlled topology with new information
about function spaces to give, conjecturally, sharp estimates for these finite
numbers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
