
* 1811096
* Differential Equations and the Geometry of Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2018,07/21/2020
* Jeff Viaclovsky,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2022
* USD 203,799.00

An important motivation for the research in this project is to understand the
relationship between the geometry and the topology of a space. The latter,
topology, is the study of properties of a space which are invariant under
continuous stretching or bendings of a space, while the former, geometry,
involves understanding distances and is more rigid. For example, the surface of
our planet is a sphere, and one measures distances between points on it by
computing lengths along great circle paths. (The Earth is actually an oblate
spheroid, but it is very close to being perfectly spherical.) One can imagine
deforming the Earth by pushing in or pulling on small or large regions to warp
the geometry. Such a deformed shape is somehow less appealing than the familiar
round Earth, and there are many ways to make this notion of being "bent out of
shape" very precise in terms of minimizing some sort of total energy
measurement. This is directly related to physical principles which say that the
state of a physical system will tend towards a final configuration which
minimizes the total energy. This idea can also be generalized to higher-
dimensional objects called manifolds, which are generalized versions of the
surface of our planet. (For example, the space that we live in is three-
dimensional, and if one includes time, we are in a four-dimensional universe.)
In order to understand these types of higher-dimensional objects, one attempts
to find the best way to measure distances on them which use the least amount of
energy, and maximize the symmetries of the space. The projects in this proposal
are to define appropriate energies on such spaces, and to seek out the important
optimal geometries which minimize the total energy.

In more technical terms, the research of the PI is, broadly speaking, to use
solutions of partial differential equations which are geometric in origin to
study properties of differentiable manifolds. The main areas of concentration of
the PI's research are the desingularization of Einstein orbifolds, the
construction of sequences of collapsing Ricci-flat metrics on K3 surfaces, the
construction of a global moduli space of scalar-flat Kahler ALE metrics, and the
study of the orbifold Yamabe problem. In joint work with Morteza, an existence
theorem for Einstein metrics was proved in the asymptotically hyperbolic
Einstein setting, which generalized a result of Biquard in dimension four, and
the PI proposes several extensions and generalizations of this work. In ongoing
work with Hein, Sun, and Zhang, the PI has constructed new examples of Ricci-
flat metrics on K3 surfaces which collapse to an interval, with Heisenberg
nilmanifolds occurring as fibers in the regular collapsing regions. There are
many interesting questions resulting from this work, especially to relate these
degenerations to polarized degenerations of K3 surfaces. In joint work with Han,
the PI proposes a plan towards constructing a global moduli space of scalar-flat
Kahler ALE metrics for certain groups at infinity. Also, in joint work with Tao
Ju, the PI has proved some nonexistence results for the orbifold Yamabe problem,
and plans to generalize this further. Finally, the PI is committed to
integrating research and education and cultivating intellectual development on
many levels. The PI has been active in outreach and organization of conferences
in the mathematics community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
