
* 1811558
* Comparison Geometry and Rigidity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2018,05/10/2018
* Guofang Wei,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2021
* USD 172,138.00

The overall subject of this project is comparison geometry, a collection of
techniques whereby comparisons of the curvature of two different spaces are
related to comparisons of length, area, volume, mass and other geometric
measurements of objects in the two spaces. When one of the spaces is a well-
understood `model' space, comparison geometry often provides optimal estimates
that are useful for other areas of mathematics (for example, playing an
essential role in the resolution of the Poincare conjecture) as well as other
sciences. In this project, the principal investigator will use comparison
geometry to estimate the fundamental gap for domains in smooth manifolds. This
gap is the difference between the first two eigenvalues of the Laplacian: to
explain this, the Laplacian frequently occurs in mathematical physics when
modelling the propagation of waves through various media, and the eigenvalues
are the resonant frequencies of the domain. The mass gap is also related to
quantum mechanics, where it represents the energy needed to excite a particle
from its ground state to the next energy level. Advancement in this project will
thus have potential benefits in mathematics and physics. The PI also plans to
estimate the volume entropy for non-smooth spaces known as metric measure
spaces, and the PI's results on entropy rigidity will be relevant to optimal
transport, information geometry and discrete geometry. This project will also
support education and training of graduate students and young researchers,
through postdoctoral mentoring and teaching. This project is concerned with
several problems centered around comparison geometry. By comparing to a good
model, comparison geometry often provides optimal estimates. For example,
Perelman's reduced volume monotonicity, which is the fundamental tool in his
work on the Poincare and geometrization conjectures, can be viewed as
generalization of Bishop-Gromov volume comparison to Ricci flow. Andrews and
Clutterbuck proved the fundamental gap conjecture by showing the first
eigenfunction is more log-concave than the model. The PI will study the
eigenvalue and fundamental gap comparison estimates for the Laplacian (with
Dirichlet boundary conditions) on a convex domain in locally symmetric spaces,
and on closed manifolds (with Neumann boundary conditions) with integral Ricci
curvature lower bound and non-smooth extensions. The PI will also study the
relation between comparison geometry and Ricci flow (including almost rigidity
results for Ricci flow) as well as volume entropy comparison and rigidity for
metric measure spaces with curvature lower bounds. Volume entropy is a
fundamental geometric invariant for compact smooth manifolds, and this concept
is closely related to other notions of entropy found in dynamical systems. It
plays an essential role in differential geometry and geometric group theory
(among others), and studying the non-smooth case will have applications to
Gromov-Hausdorff limits of smooth manifolds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
