
* 1904342
* New Perspectives on Four-Dimensional Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2019,08/17/2019
* Renato Ghini Bettiol,NY,Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2023
* USD 220,855.00

The mathematical concept of a four-dimensional object allows a more
comprehensive study of three-dimensional objects that exist in our physical
world by considering its points (encoded as three space coordinates) together
with any other relevant quantity, for example its temperature, pressure, or
electric conductivity. This simultaneous treatment of space coordinates and
other pointwise parameters is both essential and ubiquitous in modern science,
from spacetimes in Einstein's theory of General Relativity and D-branes in
Particle Physics, to mathematical models used in medical imaging and diagnosis,
industrial robotics, urban traffic flows, financial markets, and wireless
communications, among many others. The main goal of this project is to advance
the geometric understanding of four-dimensional objects as abstract mathematical
entities, an approach that is general enough to allow applications to any field
that makes use of four-dimensional models. In particular, this project will
analyze how rigid or malleable certain four-dimensional shapes are, how that
changes under certain natural curvature assumptions, and how to efficiently
detect these curvature properties. A defining characteristic of the research to
be conducted is the use of cutting-edge techniques recently developed in areas
of mathematics not traditionally associated with geometry, bringing new
perspectives to a classical subject, in a disruptive attempt to solve some of
its most important open questions. This project will also partially support the
CUNY Geometric Analysis seminar, and its educational mission in the CUNY
graduate program, through the communication of latest research advances in the
field; as well as several public outreach activities at CUNY Lehman College, a
Hispanic Serving Institution in the Bronx borough of New York City. In more
technical terms, this project will pursue various applications of the emerging
fields of Convex Algebraic Geometry and Semidefinite Programming to Geometric
Analysis and Riemannian Geometry, for instance through the study of
semialgebraic sets of curvature operators of four-manifolds with sectional
curvature bounds as spectrahedral shadows and limits of spectrahedra. This real
algebro-geometric viewpoint on curvature operators of four-manifolds is expected
to have several global consequences in the form of explicit algebraic
(polynomial) characterizations of sectional curvature bounds, rank rigidity
results, and optimization of curvature estimates. Furthermore, the project seeks
to detect new topological obstructions to positive curvature in four-manifolds
using the aforementioned techniques and trisections of their fundamental groups.
Other topics covered include four-dimensional Einstein manifolds, Ricci
solitons, and Ricci flow. Most of the research will be conducted in
collaboration with doctoral students, early-career mathematicians, and other
researchers, partially supporting the training of new specialists in the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
