
* 1906220
* Relating Fukaya Categories Using Combinatorics, Operads, and Nonlinear Elliptic Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2019,06/26/2019
* Nathaniel Bottman,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 11/30/2019
* USD 143,785.00

Symplectic manifolds are the modern mathematical setting for classical dynamical
systems. For instance, consider the motion of the Earth, the Moon, and a
satellite, under the influence of gravity. The state of this system can be
described by the positions and momenta of the three bodies, and the collection
of all possible states is an example of a symplectic manifold. Physical laws,
such as the conservation of energy and of momentum, restrict how this system can
evolve. The goal of this project is to understand relationships between
different symplectic manifolds, and specifically to understand how the
restrictions on trajectories, such as those arising from conservation laws, can
be translated from one symplectic manifold to another. While progress has been
made toward this goal, the PI has proposed the first comprehensive approach.
This project has a significant combinatorial component, which is an ideal point-
of-entry for undergraduates. The PI is currently supervising an undergraduate
research project, and aims to continue involving undergraduate and graduate
students in his research program.

Specifically, the PI aims to construct a single algebraic object, the
"symplectic (A-infinity,2)-category Symp", which binds together the Fukaya
categories of symplectic manifolds into a single structure. This extends earlier
work of Wehrheim-Woodward, in which those authors associate functors between
Fukaya categories to Lagrangian correspondences. Besides this central component,
the PI's proposed project involves three other elements. First, the PI will
compute portions of Symp in some concrete situations. The PI has begun to
develop techniques for computing the functors associated to Lagrangian
correspondences in the context of symplectic reduction, and plans to continue
these explorations. In particular, he is working with Ritter to builds on
earlier work by Ritter-Smith in order to suggest a strategy for understanding
how the Fukaya category changes under complex blowup. Second, the PI will
explore connections to other fields. Formulating the combinatorial structures
necessary for Symp led the PI to construct the 2-associahedra, which are
intricate abstract polytopes which fit in well with several existing
combinatorial objects. In joint work with Alexei Oblomkov, the PI is
constructing complexified versions of 2-associahedra, which form a rich new
family of proper log-smooth complex varieties with a close relationship to
M_{0,n}-bar. Another connection is to the theory of higher categories: Symp will
be an (A-infinity,2)-category, a new algebraic structure which the PI intends to
show is a convenient model for certain (infinity,2)-categories. Finally, the PI
aims to understand the ramifications of the symplectic (A-infinity,2)-category
for symplectic cohomology, an important invariant of a noncompact symplectic
manifold. Indeed, understanding the role of unit 1-morphisms in Symp should
enable the PI to equip symplectic cohomology with a chain-level algebraic
structure, as conjectured by Abouzaid.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
