
* 1906451
* Anisotropic Energy Functionals in Geometric Analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2019,07/25/2019
* Antonio De Rosa,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 01/31/2021
* USD 124,242.00

Anisotropic energies were introduced by Gibbs in the 19th century to model the
equilibrium shape of crystals and, more generally, the surface tension at the
interfaces of any two different materials. An increasing interest has been
devoted to the corresponding geometric variational problems in mathematics.
Minimizing the area functional, the simplest anisotropic energy, is one of the
most famous examples in this class of problems. It dates back to the work of
Lagrange in 1760 and has had a major impact both in physics and in mathematics.
Jesse Douglas was awarded the first Fields Medal in 1936 for his results on this
topic; yet, a variety of basic questions remain open, especially in the more
general anisotropic setting. The goal of this project is to develop new theories
and techniques to improve the state of the art of anisotropic geometric
variational problems. This project aims to increase our understanding of
critical points for general elliptic integrands. In contrast to the reach theory
of minimal surfaces, i.e., critical points of the area functional, very little
is understood in the anisotropic framework. One of the main themes of this
project is the existence of anisotropic minimal hypersurfaces in closed
Riemannian manifolds. This is a fascinating and central question in geometric
analysis, which has been answered for the area functional by Pitts, Schoen,
Simon and Yau in the eighties. The investigator will address the more general
anisotropic setting, broadening the reach of the min-max theory. This will
require a refined analysis of the structure of varifolds, which will find
applications also in the construction of geometric flows. Another goal of this
project is to study existence and regularity results for energy minimizers of
the set-theoretic Plateau problem in general metric spaces. This investigation
will be then further refined for size minimizer rectifiable currents. Moreover,
the investigator will study the behavior of hypersurfaces with almost constant
anisotropic mean curvature. Finally, the stability and regularity conjectures in
optimal branched transport will be addressed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
