
* 1906403
* Moduli Spaces of Higgs Bundles, Hermitian-Yang-Mills Connections, and Related Topics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2019,08/16/2021
* Richard Wentworth,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 339,999.00

The notion of a moduli space occupies an ever increasingly important role in
geometry and physics. It has also proved useful to certain applied fields such
as robotics. Moduli are parameters describing the variation in a particular
geometric or algebraic structure. The construction of a moduli space brings with
it a deeper understanding of which geometric structures behave well in families,
and the geometric analysis of the moduli space itself reveals invariant
properties of the objects they parametrize. The current project seeks to extend
the PI's previous work on certain moduli spaces that arise naturally from the
gauge theory of elementary particles. The Yang-Mills equations, for example, are
a major point of intersection between mathematics and theoretical physics.
Moduli spaces of Higgs bundles have been used to study the space of
representations of surface groups into complex Lie groups and their noncompact
real forms. They appear in supersymmetric gauge theories and are also important
in the Geometric Langlands problem. The research projects covered by this award
will further our understanding of the relationship between the geometric,
analytic, and algebraic properties of moduli spaces. The award also supports
graduate students.

The specific goals lie in three areas of complex geometry related to holomorphic
bundles, gauge theory, and moduli problems. The first continues work of the PI
on moduli spaces of Higgs bundles on Riemann surfaces. A special focus is given
to understanding the asymptotic structure of the moduli space and its
topological properties. This is related to important conjectures concerning the
geometry of the Hitchin moduli space, in part arising from supersymmetric gauge
theories. The PI will generalize previous results about the pressure metric on
Hitchin components away from the Fuchsian locus. He will also explore
implications for mirror symmetry calculations related to new properties of the
Morse stratification of the Higgs and de Rham moduli spaces that follow from his
recent work. The second project continues work on Hermitian-Yang-Mills
connections on higher dimensional manifolds. One goal is to obtain a better
understanding of natural gauge theoretic compactifications. The PI also seeks to
extend results for projective manifolds to the Kaehler case. A related problem
will study wall-crossing properties of solutions to generalized Yang-Mills
equations. The third project builds on the PIs previous investigation of
holomorphic extensions of analytic torsion via the approach of Deligne
pairings.This will have implications for complex Chern-Simons theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
