
* 1906352
* Complex Geometric and Lie Theoretic Aspects of Hodge Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2019,08/01/2022
* Colleen Robles,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 224,003.00

Algebraic geometry is a field of mathematics concerned with the solutions of
(systems of) polynomial equations. These solution sets are called algebraic
varieties, and one is interested in understanding their algebraic and geometric
properties. These structures can be quite complicated and mysterious. One way to
gain some insight is to consider the variety's "Hodge structure". This is a
simpler object with a linear algebraic nature, that nonetheless often encodes a
great deal of information about the variety. The theme of this project is the
application of representation theory (a sophisticated generalization of linear
algebra) to obtain geometric insight into these varieties.

Topics addressed in this project include: (a) degenerations of Hodge structure,
and their application to the study of moduli spaces and their compactifications;
(b) characteristic varieties of a variation of Hodge structure (this program is
driven by a close analogy with the Hwang-Mok program to study Fano manifolds via
their varieties of minimal rational tangents); and (c) structure of hyperkahler
cohomology as a representation of the Looijenga-Lunts-Verbitsky algebra.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
