
* 1906326
* Gromov-Witten Invariants and Extraordinary Cohomology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2019,08/23/2021
* Alexander Givental,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 374,640.00

From a general perspective, problems we deal with in our research lie at the
intersection of two major pathways in mathematics of the past two centuries. One
of them is the in-depth pursuit of the intricate properties of algebraic curves
- in the form inherited from works of Gauss, Abel, Jacobi, Riemann, Klein and
Poincare. The other is the broad conceptual landscaping of mathematical physics
dictated by the progress of classical and quantum mechanics, and often
associated with the names of Hamilton, Maxwell, Gibbs, Poincare, Hilbert,
Einstein and Weyl. It is string theory that in the search for the ultimate laws
of nature places algebraic curves at the center of modern fundamental physics,
generating new mathematical questions and pointing out plausible answers with an
amazing pace and persistence. Some of the problems we work on are motivated by
such questions, some others hopefully provide answers that string theorist did
not really anticipate. The award will be used to support at least three PhD
students. The PI's work will also influence the climate in STEM education
through his involvement with K-12 and higher level educational projects, such as
Math Olympiads, math circles, book publishing, and expository writing.

The specific goals of the project build upon the success of the theory of the
so-called K-theoretic Gromov-Witten invariants, developed by the PI among other
researchers, and studying topological invariants of phase manifolds of
Hamiltonian systems based on properties of vector bundles over moduli spaces of
holomorphic curves in these manifolds. From a formal homotopy theory viewpoint,
K-theoretic invariants, as well as their cohomological predecessors, should be
specializations of much more general cobordism-valued invariants. An approach,
referred here as "formal", disregards the subtle stacky or orbifold properties
of the moduli spaces, and should be contrasted with the "genuine" theory fully
capturing these subtleties. In this project, the PI and his collaborators will
move beyond cohomological and K-theoretic Gromov-Witten invariants, and explore
the possibility of defining and computing genuine, as opposed to formal, Gromov-
Witten invariants with values in complex cobordisms. One direction is to include
quantum "chi-y"-theory (based on the Hirzebruch genus), with expected
connections with, and applications to representation theory and quiver
varieties. Another direction is to explore the specialization to the theory
(where y=-1) based on the topological Euler characteristics of moduli spaces of
stable maps. Yet another one is to examine the prospects of Gromov-Witten theory
based on elliptic cohomology. The general question on the background is: Which
extraordinary cohomology theories can home all compact complex orbifolds (as
opposed to manifolds)?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
