
* 2005553
* Geometric Flows and Analysis on Metric Spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2020,09/07/2022
* Bruce Kleiner,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2023
* USD 387,722.00

The first part of the project involves two nonlinear partial differential
equations that arise in a number of different disciplines in science and
engineering, as well as from within mathematics. These equations describe the
motion of a curved surface or curved object which evolves so as to simplify its
shape as efficiently as possible over time. An important feature is the
formation of singularities. Singularities are what enable the solutions to model
situations where topology changes, for example when a soap bubble elongates and
splits into two bubbles. On the one hand, this flexibility has led to numerous
profound applications; on the other, it creates great intellectual challenges
which have occupied mathematicians for more than 40 years. The proposed research
aims to build on successes in the last few years, to address some of the main
open problems. The second part of the project applies ideas from geometry and
analysis to study the structure of rough objects, including fractals. This area
has been developing very rapidly in the last 20 years, due to new connections
between different parts of mathematics, and applications to problems from
computer science. The project also involves substantial training of PhD
students.

The project aims to study two nonlinear analogs of the heat equation: evolution
of surfaces by mean curvature, and Hamilton's Ricci flow. Evolution by mean
curvature has been studied for decades as a natural model for evolving surface
interfaces. Ricci flow describes an evolving geometry, and was used in
Perelman's solution of the Poincare conjecture. The primary objective of the
proposed research on these equations is to study issues related to the formation
of singularities in their solutions, including their structure and stability.
The resolution of fundamental conjectures in geometry and topology is an
outgrowth of this work. Another component of the research program is an
investigation of spaces which have a self-similar or fractal character, using
analytic tools that have been developed in the last few years. Here one of the
goals is to deform the space into an optimal form, if possible, in order to
reveal hidden symmetries, and otherwise show that no hidden symmetries exist.
This is very useful for understanding the asymptotic shape of infinite groups,
and is part of confluence of several research trends over the last 15-20 years.
Another application of similar ideas is to embedding problems in theoretical
computer science: Cheeger, Naor, and the PI were able to substantially improve
the previous best known results on the embedding of spaces of negative type, in
connection with the quantitative version of the Goemans-Linial conjecture. This
project specifically addresses geometric evolution equations, embedding
problems, analysis on metric spaces, and geometric group theory. The evolution
equations in the project are mean curvature flow and Ricci flow. The research in
analysis on metric spaces clusters in three areas: (1) bilipschitz embedding
problems and related issues, (2) the structure of spaces satisfying Poincare
inequalities, (3) the structure of boundaries of Gromov hyperbolic spaces.
Common themes in all three areas are spaces satisfying Poincare inequalities,
and rescaling arguments leading to singular limit spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
