
* 2005287
* Geometric Variational Problems and Scalar Curvature
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2020,04/24/2020
* Chao Li,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Krishnan Shankar
* 12/31/2021
* USD 174,485.00

One aspect of the proposed research has to do with the geometry and topology of
manifolds with scalar curvature lower bounds. Scalar curvature is the simplest
curvature invariant of a Riemannian manifold. It represents the amount by which
the volume of a small geodesic ball in a Riemannian manifold deviates from that
of the standard ball in Euclidean space. Scalar curvature also arises in natural
sciences. For instance, in general relativity, it is the Lagrangian density of
the Einstein-Hilbert action. A natural and deep question in geometry, topology
and mathematical physics is to understand the affect of scalar curvature
conditions on a manifold. The other main area of investigation concerns minimal
surfaces. Minimal surfaces arise as the mathematical model of a number of
interfaces in nature. In mathematical model of general relativity, minimal
surfaces occur as ?apparent horizons? of black holes; soap films and capillary
interfaces also provide examples of minimal surfaces. The PI will investigate
the existence, regularity and topology of minimal surfaces. The two aspects
proposed here are deeply connected via geometric variational theory.

The project concerns a range topics on differential geometry, geometric measure
theory and partial differential equations. A main theme of the research in
geometry will be a geometric comparison theorem for scalar curvature using
Riemannian polyhedra, with the aim to define weak notions of positive scalar
curvature on spaces with low regularity. The PI plans to continue his
investigations into such a theorem for more general polytopes, especially
simplexes of higher dimensions, and its connection to quasi-local mass in
general relativity. The PI also plans to continue his investigation on the
structure of moduli spaces of manifolds with positive scalar curvature and mean
convex boundary, including studying its high homotopy groups, and the structure
of moduli spaces defined by other related curvature conditions. In addition, the
PI will study singular spaces with scalar curvature lower bounds, and understand
when such a singular manifold arises as a certain limit of smooth manifolds with
same assumptions. A central tool in the PI?s research is the theory of minimal
varieties. The PI plans to understand the existence and regularity of minimal
surfaces with free boundary and capillary boundary conditions in general
Lipschitz domains, especially in locally convex polyhedral domains. He also
plans to establish a general existence theory of capillary surfaces via a min-
max construction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
