
* 2042303
* CAREER: Singular Riemannian Foliations and Applications to Curvature and Invariant Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Marco Radeschi,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2026
* USD 165,371.00

Riemannian Geometry studies the shape of smooth spaces, called Riemannian
manifolds, by looking at measurable properties such as lengths, distances,
angles, volumes and curvature - which quantify how much space is deformed
compared to the familiar flat space. Riemannian manifolds appear everywhere in
physics, modeling the membrane of a cell as well as spacetime in general
relativity, and Riemannian geometry offers fundamental tools to study their
properties. One concept of paramount importance, when studying physical objects
as well as Riemannian manifolds in general, is that of symmetry, that is, the
degree of "self similarity" of a geometric object, which make it invariant under
certain length-preserving transformations (called isometries). Symmetry can be
further generalized with the idea of partitioning a geometric object into
"sheets", which stay parallel to one another. This idea, formalized by the
mathematical concept of singular Riemannian foliation, is at the center of the
mathematical investigation of this project. Here, we use ideas introduced by the
PI and collaborators to study the local behavior of these structures, as well as
use them globally to produce new manifolds with desirable curvature. In this
project, geometry is also used as a broad concept to encompass a number of
activities for the mathematical community and society in general, such as: 1)
Organizing a four-weeks-long thematic program in Metric Geometry, with schools
for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a week-long conference. 2)
Organizing a weekly math camp for girls in 3rd grade and up which is aimed at
addressing the gender imbalance in the mathematical disciplines.

The main goal of this project is to study singular Riemannian foliations, both
to further understand their structure and to apply them to Invariant Theory and
Riemannian Geometry. The local study of singular Riemannian foliations, namely
foliations on a Euclidean space with the origin as one leaf, generalizes
orthogonal representations of Lie groups. The PI proved in a recent joint work
that infinitesimal submetries have an algebraic counterpart, given by certain
polynomial algebras called Laplacian algebras. This opens the door to a novel
approach called "Invariant theory without groups", consisting in understanding
how to read geometric properties of manifold submetries off of their Laplacian
algebra, and apply these techniques to the special case in which the submetry
comes from an orthogonal representation. Globally, singular Riemannian
foliations can conjecturally arise from collapsing sequences of manifolds with a
uniform lower sectional curvature bound: One project will try to prove this
locally. Furthermore, singular Riemannian foliations will be used to produce new
examples of manifolds with non-negative and positive curvature.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
