
* 2103573
* Geometric Flows, Geometric Inequalities, and Rigidity of Embeddings
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Simon Brendle,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2024
* USD 145,924.00

This project is focused on questions in differential geometry. The aim of
differential geometry is to study higher-dimensional shapes and their curvature.
In particular, these concepts provide a mathematical framework for general
relativity. Geometric flows are a key tool in differential geometry. The idea
here is to take a geometric object and evolve it by a differential equation in
order to smooth it out. These differential equations share common features with
heat diffusion. However, the differential equations that arise in geometry tend
to be nonlinear, which presents challenges in their analysis. A main focus is to
understand the behavior of these equations when the solution becomes singular,
that is, when the curvature becomes very large. An important problem is to
classify the singularity models; these are the limiting shapes that occur at a
singularity. Another major goal in geometry is to understand geometric
inequalities. A basic example is the isoperimetric inequality (which states that
balls have smallest surface area among all shapes that enclose a given amount of
volume), but many other types of inequalities are of importance in differential
geometry. The project also includes training of PhD students and mentoring of
post-doctoral researchers.

The primary examples of geometric flows are the Ricci flow and the mean
curvature flow. The mean curvature flow is the most natural evolution equation
for a surface embedded in Euclidean space, while the Ricci flow is the most
natural evolution equation for a Riemannian metric. The Ricci flow has become an
indispensable tool in differential geometry. Among other things, the Ricci flow
lies at the heart of Perelman's proof of the Poincare conjecture. The PI will
study what types of singularities can form under these evolution equations. For
example, it would be very interesting to understand whether a plane of
multiplicity 2 can arise as a singularity model under the mean curvature flow.
In another direction, the PI will study problems related to geometric
inequalities. In particular, it would be very interesting to understand
isoperimetric inequalities in negatively curved manifolds. Moreover, many
geometric inequalities come with an associated rigidity statement which
characterizes the case of equality. The PI will study the near-equality case in
such inequalities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
