
* 2104254
* Sharp Eigenvalue Inequalities and Minimal Surfaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2021,01/09/2023
* Antoine Song,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2024
* USD 161,622.00

This project is broadly concerned with the subject of spectral geometry, which
studies the relation between certain analytic invariants (called spectra) of
objects and the shape (or geometry) of these objects. A classical example of a
spectrum is a Laplacian spectrum. It is a sequence of numbers encoding the
information about many physical properties of an object such as elasticity, heat
and sound propagations and many others. More specifically, this project deals
with the spectral geometry of special shapes such as soap films. The geometry of
soap films is a central subject of modern geometric analysis with applications
far beyond the one suggested by their name, most prominently to mathematical
theory of general relativity. Spectral geometry of soap films is an exciting
novel area of research on the interface of spectral theory and geometry. The
inherent interdisciplinary nature of this field results in a fruitful exchange
of ideas between spectral theory and geometric analysis. The goal of the project
is to further develop the techniques and ideas introduced the recent years, to
investigate their applications beyond spectral geometry and to interest young
researchers in this new promising subject. The project also includes summer
research opportunities for undergraduate students.

The project is devoted to the study of sharp isoperimetric inequalities for
eigenvalues of natural geometric operators on manifolds. The underlying
principle of the field is the correspondence between optimal metrics for such
inequalities and minimal submanifolds. As a result, a variety of methods can be
applied to this problem and advances in the field often result in interesting
information on the geometry of minimal submanifolds. The following four problems
are identified as the focus of the project. The first goal is to extend PI?s
prior results on the explicit form of the sharp isoperimetric inequality for all
Laplacian eigenvalues on the projective plane to the case of more complicated
surfaces, starting with a torus. The second project will study the regularity
and stability of optimal metrics. This will be achieved using the energy min-max
characterization of the optimal eigenvalue inequalities obtained in
collaboration with D. Stern. The third goal is to investigate the asymptotic
behavior of optimal metrics for the first Steklov eigenvalue as the number of
boundary components becomes unbounded. Numerical simulations predict that a
novel geometric phenomenon manifests itself in this regime: the corresponding
free boundary minimal surfaces converge to a closed minimal surface in the
boundary. The aim is to verify this theoretically and further understand the
mechanisms of such convergence. Finally, the project will develop the theory of
isoperimetric inequalities for eigenvalues of Dirac operator following the
framework of Laplace and Steklov eigenvalues. Broader impacts include co-
organizing conferences and mentoring undergraduate students in summer research
projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
