
* 2104349
* Evolution equations in geometry and related fields
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Tobias Colding,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 253,350.00

Evolution equations are fundamental objects in the sciences, describing how
natural phenomena change over time. The two main parts of this project concern
evolution equations or results that should lead to applications to evolution
equations. The first part is about mean curvature flow which has been used and
studied in materials science for almost a century to model things like cell,
grain, and bubble growth. The second is related to the new methods for dealing
with the collections of transformations of (the gauge group) for non-compact
spaces with applications to Ricci flow. The mean curvature flow?s computational
and theoretical study and its applications as well as that of other similar
flows have had enormous impact in diverse areas of pure and applied mathematics,
theoretical physics,material science, and engineering. For broader impacts the
PI will continue mentoring and advising graduate students and post-doctoral
scholars, write a second graduate level book on ?Heat equation in Analysis,
Geometry and Probability", and disseminate their work via lectures, workshops
and conferences.

In mean curvature flow (MCF) the project will study questions about stable
structures; both for hypersurfaces and submanifolds of higher codimension. In
the second project a new way of dealing with the diffeomorphism group will be
investigated that should be useful in many settings. Indeed, in many problems
across a wide swath of areas singularities occur. Understanding them and the set
where they form becomes a question of great importance. When the objects sit
inside some canonical space, one can use ``extrinsic'' reference points to make
progress on important questions like these. However, many key problems are
defined intrinsically and there are no canonical reference points. In those
problems, the infinite dimensional diffeomorphism group (the gauge group)
becomes a major issue and dealing with it, and understanding it, becomes a major
obstacle. Ricci flow is such an example. The PI expects that the projects on
MCF, Ricci flow and gauge groups will have implications to a number of other
fields of mathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
