
* 2109577
* Kahler Manifolds with Prescribed Ricci Curvature
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Ronan Conlon,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2024
* USD 140,624.00

Complex manifolds are higher-dimensional surfaces that are defined using the
complex numbers. A "metric" on such a space is an object that endows that space
with a shape or more precisely, with Ricci curvature. The study of these metrics
lies at the nexus of complex geometry and geometric analysis. This project is
concerned with the construction of complete Kahler metrics with prescribed Ricci
curvature on non-compact Kahler manifolds; more specifically, non-compact
Calabi-Yau manifolds and Kahler-Ricci solitons. Applications of such manifolds
permeate throughout physics and mathematics. Indeed, Calabi-Yau manifolds of
complex dimension three have become prominent in string theory where they
supposedly model the six additional real dimensions of space-time that we do not
see, whereas Kahler-Ricci solitons provide models for the formation of
singularities in an important evolution equation, namely the Kahler-Ricci flow.
Efforts will be made to construct new examples of these manifolds and to
formulate their existence in terms of algebraic geometric criteria. This will
enhance our understanding of the geometry of non-compact Kahler manifolds and
will involve applications of techniques from analysis, in particular partial
differential equations, and algebraic geometry.

In more technical terms, the proposed research project comprises two parts. The
goal of the first part is to construct more examples of non-compact complete
Calabi-Yau manifolds with Euclidean volume growth and with a singular non-flat
tangent cone at infinity, developing the work of Li, the PI and Rochon, and
Szekelyhidi. Such manifolds have been used as building blocks for G2-manifolds
and may shed light on a conjecture of Yau asserting the compactifiability of a
complete Calabi-Yau manifold with finite topology. Moreover, these manifolds
have applications in physics such as in the AdS/CFT correspondence and string
theory. The second part of the proposal deals with studying complete non-compact
gradient Kahler-Ricci solitons. The objectives of this part are threefold. (1)
To glue the expanding gradient Kahler-Ricci solitons that the PI has constructed
with Deruelle together on a compact Kahler manifold to construct a solution of
the Kahler-Ricci flow with singular initial data. This ties in with the analytic
Minimal Model Program using the Kahler-Ricci flow proposed by Song and Tian and
builds on the work of Gianniotis and Schulze. (2) To construct examples of
complete expanding gradient Kahler-Ricci solitons with a singular tangent cone
at infinity with Euclidean volume growth of which there are currently no known
examples. This builds on the work of the PI and Deruelle. (3) To study the
existence and uniqueness of non-compact complete shrinking gradient Kahler-Ricci
solitons for a fixed holomorphic vector field. This is a natural extension of
work by the PI, Deruelle, and Sun.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
