
* 2203686
* Comparison and Inverse Comparison Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2022,08/02/2022
* Frederick Wilhelm,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2025
* USD 364,931.00

In 1827, Gauss published his now famous Theorema Egregium, which roughly
translates into English as Remarkable Theorem. The Theorema Egregium established
a relationship between the way a surface curves inside of space and how its
intrinsic geometry differs from that of the classical geometry of the plane,
studied by Euclid. An immediate consequence of the Theorema Egregium is that it
is impossible to make a map of the world without distorting some crucial aspects
of its geometry. More startling was the generalization of Gausss ideas to
higher-dimensional spaces by his student Riemann in the mid 19th century, which
gave birth to the subject that is now known as Riemannian Geometry. While
Riemannian Geometry and its generalizations have found wide-ranging
applications, for example, in relativity, particle physics, and data science,
answers to many basic, fundamental questions in the subject are enduring
mysteries. This project is a two-pronged attack on some of these questions via
what are known as Comparison Geometry and Inverse Comparison Geometry.
Comparison Geometry is the branch of Global Riemannian Geometry that draws
geometric and topological conclusions about a space with some constraint on its
curvature by comparing it to a model space with constant curvature. Inverse
Comparison Geometry concerns the opposite question; that is, which spaces admit
Riemannian geometries that satisfy a given geometric constraint. The project
will employ methods from both subjects to continue attacking problems that lie
at the heart of Global Riemannian Geometry. The project also includes advising
and mentoring of students, continued commitment to DEI initiatives and
mathematical dissemination.

This research centers on three basic problems: the Diffeomorphism Stability
Question, the Pinching Problem in positive curvature, and the constructions of
manifolds with almost nonnegative curvature. The Diffeomorphism Stability
Question asks whether a Gromov-Hausdorff convergent sequence of Riemannian
manifolds has a stable diffeomorphism type provided the sequence is
noncollapsing and has a uniform lower sectional curvature bound. Perelman's
stability theorem guarantees that such a sequence has a stable topological type,
and a result of Kuwae, Machigashira, and Shioya guarantees a stable
diffeomorphism type provided the limit is nonsingular, in the appropriate sense.
A generic limit has singularities. Nevertheless, the PI and his collaborators
Grove, Sill, and Pro, have established that certain singular limit spaces are
di¤eomorphically stable. This includes a recent result by Pro and the PI showing
that Diffeomorphism Stability holds in dimension 4, regardless of the singular
structure of the limit space. Together with prior work by Grove-Petersen-Wu,
Perelman, and Kirby-Siebenmann, this means that the conclusion of Cheeger's
Finiteness Theorem holds without the hypothesis of the upper curvature bound.
The project aims to establish (jointly with Chambers and Pro) that Piecewise
Linear Stability holds in all dimensions. The project with Searle and Solórzano
will develop tools to show that some limit spaces are not diffeomorphically
stable. Searle, Solórzano, and the PI will also use these tools to show that
there are almost nonnegatively curved exotic spheres in all dimensions 7 and
higher that are congruent to 3 mod 4. The Pinching Problem in positive curvature
asks how the topology of a positively curved manifold is constrained as its
curvature is pinched. The gap between theorems and examples in this area is
startling. The project in collaboration with Guijarro and Murphy will improve
the Abresch-Meyer injectivity radius estimate by exploiting the Jacobi Field
Comparison Lemma of Guijarro and the PI. The project also includes significant
training and mentoring of students, mathematical dissemination and commitment to
service and DEI initiatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
