
* 2203132
* Mean Curvature Flow and Singular Minimal Surfaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2022,07/18/2022
* Jacob Bernstein,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2025
* USD 234,391.00

This project concerns the geometric calculus of variations, that is, the study
of the properties of objects that are optimal in some sense for a geometric
functional. Variational questions arise in several areas of pure and applied
mathematics and in many physical sciences. For example, minimal surfaces arise
as critical points of the area functional and provide a mathematical model of
soap films. Another example is an entropy functional for submanifolds that
serves as a natural measure of the complexity of a surface. The main tool used
to study this functional is the mean curvature flow, which is a dynamic process
that, roughly speaking, continuously deforms a surface in a manner that
decreases its area as quickly as possible. Mean curvature flow was first studied
as a model of certain phenomena in materials science and has also found
applications in computer graphics and image recognition. This project aims to
advance understanding in this area through study of minimal surfaces, especially
those that are singular, and their connections to the submanifold entropy
functional. The project includes opportunities for research training of graduate
students.

This project will study properties of singular minimal surfaces and singular
mean curvature flows. A particular focus is on exploring, via the mean curvature
flow, how Colding-Minicozzi entropy relates to properties of minimal
submanifolds in a variety of settings. Another avenue of exploration is the
study of singular minimal surfaces whose singularities are modeled on those
observed in soap films.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
