
* 2203310
* Ricci Flows and Steady Ricci Solitons
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2022,05/02/2022
* Yi Lai,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2025
* USD 173,858.00

This award supports research in differential geometry focusing on Ricci flows.
These flows are defined on manifolds equipped with a metric, that is to say, a
way of measuring distance. A Ricci flow is a geometric partial differential
equation for Riemannian metrics. The Ricci flow tends to evolve an initial
metric into a more homogeneous one. The singularity analysis of Ricci flow is a
central subject, as it helps to understand the geometry and topology of
manifolds. The most remarkable application in this direction is the resolution
of the Poincare conjecture and the Geometrization conjecture by Perelman. Many
of the Ricci flow singularity models are Ricci solitons. Recent examples of
solitons constructed by the PI look like flying wings. The PI will study the
geometry of all 3-dimensional steady Ricci solitons and try to classify them by
their asymptotic limits. In addition, the PI will study the higher-dimensional
steady Ricci solitons and see if they can arise as singularity models.



The research project is split into two projects. The first project is to prove
the O(2)-symmetry of all 3-dimensional steady Ricci solitons. This includes
showing that the Bryant soliton is the unique 3-dimensional steady Ricci soliton
that is asymptotic to a ray. This extends a previous result of the PI in which
one assumes the O(2)-symmetry of the soliton. The PI developed some methods that
may be extended to the more general class of ancient collapsed Ricci flows in
dimension 3. In particular, the PI will investigate the symmetry of the ancient
collapsed Ricci flows in dimension 3 and aim at classifying them by certain
2-dimensional limits. The second project is a continuation of the PI's work on
the existence theory of Ricci flows coming out of non-compact initial manifolds.
The PI will investigate the applications of non-compact Ricci flows in topology
and geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
