
* 2204346
* Moduli Spaces of Higgs Bundles, Gauge Theory, and Related Topics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2022,08/05/2022
* Richard Wentworth,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Moduli are parameters describing the variation of a particular geometric or
algebraic structure. The construction of a moduli space brings with it a deeper
understanding of which geometric structures behave well in families, and the
geometric analysis of the moduli space itself reveals invariant properties of
the objects they parametrize. This notion plays an important role in geometry
and physics. It has also proved useful to certain applied fields such as
robotics. This project seeks to extend the PI?s previous work on certain moduli
spaces that arise naturally from the gauge theory of elementary particles. The
research supported by this award will further our understanding of the
relationship between the geometric, analytic, and algebraic properties of moduli
spaces. The PI will continue mentoring undergraduate and graduate students, as
well as other early career researchers. He will co-organize workshops and
conferences to introduce students to the latest developments in the field and to
give a platform to recent Ph.D. recipients to announce the results of their
research.

The specific goals of this project lie in three areas of complex geometry
related to holomorphic bundles, gauge theory, and moduli problems. The first
continues work of the PI on moduli spaces of Higgs bundles on Riemann surfaces.
These include three subprojects: (1) conformal limits for parabolic lambda-
connections; (2) an analytic construction of the universal moduli space of Higgs
bundles over varying Riemann surfaces; and (3) the asymptotic structure of the
moduli space and its topological properties. In the second area of proposed
research, the PI will prove further results surrounding his work on complex
Chern-Simons bundles. He will investigate the link with hyperholomorphic bundles
on moduli spaces, and also clarify the relationship of his constructions to
important previous work on Atiyah algebras of determinants of cohomology. The
third project is the study of higher dimensional generalizations of the Yang-
Mills equations and their relationship to the complex geometry of holomorphic
bundles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
