
* 8702359
* Mathematical Sciences: Differential Structures
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1987,02/21/1989
* Eugenio Calabi,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* James Glazebrook
* 06/30/1991
* USD 564,400.00

Eugenio Calabi will continue studying obstructions to the existence of a metric
with constant curvature on a compact Riemann surface with finitely many
prescribed singularities; Bernstein problems associated with convex surfaces
having extremal, affinely invariant area; relations between the singularities of
minimal subvarieties and their Morse index. Hermann Gluck will continue his work
on minimizing cycles in homogeneous spaces; the Blaschke problem and fibrations
of spheres by great spheres; and the topology of the space of Morse- Smale
vector fields on surfaces. Wolfgang Ziller will carry out research into Einstein
metrics, calibrations and the rigidity of symmetric spaces. Calabi's research is
in the area of geometric variational problems. The problems he will study
concern extremal Kahler metrics, the affine Plateau problem and a variational
theory of geodesics and minimal subvarieties. Gluck will be continuing the
search for the subvarieties of Lie groups and homogeneous spaces which are
volume minimizing in their homology classes. He will also work on the famous
Blaschke conjecture that every Blaschke manifold is isometric to a round sphere
or projective space. His work on Morse-Smale vector fields is concerned with
finding the homotopy type of the components of the set of such fields on the
two-sphere. Ziller's work on Einstein metrics is concerned with finding
information about manifolds which admit such metrics, that is, having constant
Ricci curvature. His work on symmetric spaces involves making local changes on
the metric whilst preserving the bounds on the curvature. Such changes result in
metrics isometric to the original metric. He will also use the method of
calibrations to investigate which subgrassmannians have minimal volume in their
homology class.
