
* 8802668
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Spectral and Isospectral Problems in Riemannian Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/1988,04/20/1988
* Peter Perry,KY,University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* James Glazebrook
* 11/30/1990
* USD 35,700.00

Peter Perry will work on two areas of spectral theory on Riemannian manifolds.
These involve the scattering theory of manifolds of constant negative curvature
and inverse spectral problems on compact Riemannian manifolds. These are
geometric problems but the techniques to be employed will involve methods of
mathematical physics. The first project will make use of the stationary
scattering theory of elliptic operators invented for for the Schrodinger
equation. The inverse spectral theory will employ techniques of partial
differential equations. The first set of problems to be addressed concerns the
spectral theory of the Laplace operator on a real hyperbolic manifold and its
connections with the theory of discrete groups of hyperbolic isometries. Perry
will concentrate on those manifolds which are quotients of hyperbolic space by a
group of hyperbolic isometries. The work will involve investigations of the
resolvent, eigenfunctions and scattering matrix of the Laplace operator on the
hyperbolic space. It is hoped that this will be helpful in studying the Selberg
trace formula and the Selberg zeta function of the isometry group. He will also
continue his study of isospectral metrics on a Riemannian manifold. By
restricting attention to metrics in a conformal class, Perry, in joint work with
Brooks and Yang has, extended some two-dimensional results to the three- and
four- dimensional case. Attempts will be made to remove the restriction to
conformal classes and to find higher dimensional results.
