
* 9500931
* Applications of Symmetry & Invariants
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/1995,03/27/1995
* Peter Olver,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/1998
* USD 110,000.00

DMS-9500931 Olver, Peter The research project will be devoted to the theory and
applications of Lie groups and the Cartan equivalence method to a variety of
problems arising in physics and engineering. Basic theoretical research goals
include the classification of the Lie transformation groups in three-dimensional
space, their differential invariants, and the associated Lie algebra cohomology.
The applications of these results fall into three broad categories. In computer
vision, a new paradigm of image processing based on differential geometric
diffusion equations relies on classifying the differential invariant signatures
of visual symmetry groups. In quantum mechanics, the analysis of quasi-exactly
solvable Schrodinger operators continues to produce significant new developments
in the study of Lie algebras of differential operators, including the remarkable
phenomenon known as "quantization of cohomology"; in the present project, the
concentration will shift to real planar quantum operators, as well as extensions
to a fully three-dimensional theory. In continuum mechanics, the application of
equivalence methods and exterior differential systems to the classification of
variational problems will be further analyzed with a view to providing canonical
forms, geometric invariants, and conservation laws for nonlinear variational
problems arising in elasticity. The goals of this research project are to
further our understanding of the mathematical theory of symmetry and invariants
in three-dimensional space, motivated by several key physical applications, of
importance in physics, engineering and medicine. In computer vision, new methods
of image processing promise to have an immediate practical impact in medical
imaging, such as the ultrasound detection of breast tumors. In elasticity, the
classification of simple forms and symmetries of general materials should have
significant consequences in the study of crack propagation and waves. In quantum
mechanics, new types of problems some of whose fundamental states are classified
by algebraic tools have known applications to molecular spectroscopy and
scattering theory.
