
* 9800955
* Mathematical Problems in Low Dimensional Gauge Theories
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/1998,03/14/2002
* Ambar Sengupta,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2002
* USD 74,646.00

Abstract Proposal: DMS-9800955 Principal Investigator: Ambar Sengupta This
project is an investigation of certain infinite dimensional functional integrals
and measures arising from geometric quantum field theories and their
relationship to natural geometric objects in two and three dimensions. In two
dimensions the object in question is the moduli space of flat connections over a
surface. This space appears in contexts as diverse as algebraic geometry and
quantum gauge theory: it is the moduli space of representations of the
fundamental group of a surface, it has arisen in the study of certain invariants
of three-dimensional manifolds, and in certain contexts it is the moduli space
of certain types of bundles over a surface. Dr. Sengupta has been led to study
the structure and nature of the moduli space through his investigation of a
limiting classical form of an infinite dimensional measure which arises in the
quantum theoretic study of gauge fields. This investigation will study the
infinite-dimensional quantum field theoretic measure, understand the way in
which it condenses onto a natural volume measure on the moduli space, and
extract information about the structure and volumes of the various strata of
this space. This investigator believes that much topological information about
the moduli space of flat connections is contained in the Yang-Mills probability
measure. It is hoped that this project will provide a fruitful example of how
probability theory can be used to understand topology in this context. In three
dimensions, this project aims to develop a rigorous analysis of the quantum-
field theoretic functional integrals arising in Chern-Simons theory and
understand, at a rigorous level, their relationship with topological invariants.
These investigations will also provide new concrete non-linear problems and
techniques, involving stochastic processes on Lie groups, in infinite-
dimensional Gaussian analysis. In broad terms, this project inv estigates
mathematical questions that arise from the deep relationship between geometry,
topology, and physics. The idea that space, time, and matter can be understood
in terms of geometry forms the foundation of Einstein's general theory of
relativity. Later, as the study of quantum theory and elementary particles
developed, it was discovered through the works of Yang, Mills, and others, that
geometry and topology play an even deeper and more subtle role in mediating the
fundamental forces of nature. In recent years, many mathematicians have focused
their attention on deep problems in topology and geometry which arise from
questions in fundamental particle physics. The mathematics here is often
understood at a rough and intuitive level. This project is devoted to putting
some of these mathematical issues on firm foundations as well as discovering new
results in the mathematical setting.
