
* 9800924
* Deformations of Complex Structures
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/1998,06/20/2001
* Christopher Bishop,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2002
* USD 234,834.00

Prof. Bishop will investigate several aspects of geometry and analysis related
to non-smooth objects such as limit sets of Kleinian groups, Brownian motion and
quasi-conformal mappings. Among the specific goals are to extend his earlier
application of harmonic analysis and heat kernel techniques to compute the exact
size (in terms of Hausdorff measures) of the limit sets of Kleinian groups to
new examples (e.g., manifolds with thin parts) and new sets (the conical limit
set, the set of escaping geodesics,...). He will also attempt to extend Bowen's
famous dichotomy to all divergence type Fuchsian groups, extending work of
Sullivan, Astala, Zinsmeister, Jones and himself. Part of this is to further
study the ``beta''s, a technical measure of how close a set is to a line segment
at different scales, which is closely related to the study of the traveling
salesman problem. He will also continue his work investigating the removable and
non-removable sets for quasi-conformal mappings, geometric properties of
Brownian motion, and other geometric-analytic questions in classical complex
analysis.

The proposal deals with a variety of geometric questions which are united by a
desire to understand traditional concepts and calculations (e.g. compute the
area of a region) in non-traditional and highly non-smooth cases. This is
motivated by (at least) two points of view. First, a better understanding of the
classical case can be obtained by seeing how it succeeds or fails in a more
general setting; even the failures lead to new, interesting phenomena to
investigate. Second, many applications of mathematics (polymers, fractures,
shock waves, wavelet analysis, crystal growth,...) involve highly irregular and
fractal objects, and we need to understand and calculate with such objects the
way we have always done with much smoother quantities. For example, Brownian
motion is a mathematical object which models random movement and is of
tremendous intrinsic interest, as well as being fundamental to understanding
many other random processes (e.g., shapes of long polymers chains, growth of
crystals by random accretion, ...). However, Brownian motion is an extremely
non-smooth process and various simple geometric questions about its random paths
are still unknown. Another example is with the Kleinian groups mentioned above.
These are symmetries in non-Euclidean geometry; as such, they are fundamental
objects in topology and have been an area of intense investigation for many
years. They can be associated with certain fractal objects (the limit sets)
involving non-linear rescalings, where the non-linearity is of a very special
type, and present a theoretical stepping stone between self-similar sets with
linear rescalings (which are fairly well understood) and much more complicated
rescalings found in rational dynamics and chaos theory.


