
* 9802947
* Semiclassical Limits of Eigenfunctions
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/1998,04/21/1998
* Dmitry Jakobson,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 08/31/2001
* USD 56,785.00

This proposal is concerned with the study of the relationship between a geodesic
flow on a Riemannian manifold on the one hand, and the asymptotic properties of
the eigenvalues and the eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator on the
other hand. The principal investigator proposes to continue his study of the
asymptotic behavior of the eigenfunctions on manifolds with either completely
integrable or ergodic geodesic flows.

The proposed research lies in the area of Quantum Chaos. The subject originated
in the study of the spectra of the atomic nuclei in the fifties. Later it was
recognized that similar phenomena occur in condensed matter physics, disordered
systems, ergodic theory, random matrices, and analytic number theory. The
questions which are often considered include the study of the spacings between
high energy levels of the system: do they behave like random numbers, or are
they more regular? Other questions concern eigenfunctions: do they become
uniformly distributed over the phase space or do they become highly concentrated
in certain regions? Many experiments suggest that the answers depend on the
classical dynamics of the system. Considerable progress has been made in
understanding the precise nature of that dependence, but many mathematical
questions remain unsolved. The questions considered in this proposal are related
to the problems that arise in building certain components of quantum computers.


