
* 9803497
* Mapping Class Groups, Teichmuller Spaces and Low Dimensional Topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/1998,06/01/1998
* Howard Masur,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2001
* USD 103,061.00

Abstract

Proposal: DMS-9803497 Principal Investigator: Howard Masur

Masur will work on several topics involving the mapping class group and
Teichmuller theory. He will finish his joint work with Yair Minsky on the
combinatorial group theory of the mapping class group. This work includes
solving the conjugacy problem and finding a biautomatic structure. The method
has been to use the hyperbolic structure of the complex of curves. Masur will
begin a study of the large scale or asymptotic geometry of the mapping class
group. This study is related to the study of the quasi-isometries of Teichmuller
space. Masur will continue his work on the representation theory of the mapping
class group. He will study certain functions called conditional negative
kernels, with the goal of proving that the group does not have Kazhdan property
T. He will also study whether surface groups admit homeomorphisms to the mapping
class group, which is related to the study of surface bundles over surfaces, a
problem in 4-manifold theory.

The field of surface topology is the study of those properties of surfaces that
do not change under deformations. The field interacts strongly with other
disciplines within mathematics, such as complex analysis, and with outside
disciplines such as physics. The mapping class group, which is the group of self
mappings of the surface, is a fundamental object of study. Many mathematicians
over the years have studied the group from a variety of viewpoints. Recently,
powerful new geometric tools have been introduced to study groups, which are the
objects of symmetry in mathematics. The principle investigator is working to
bring these new geometric ideas into the study of surfaces and the mapping class
group.


