
* 9803341
* Differential Geometry and Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/1998,09/24/2002
* Richard Schoen,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2003
* USD 222,099.00

Abstract Proposal: DMS-9803341 Principal Investigator: Richard M. Schoen This
proposal deals with three geometric variational problems. The first is the
problem of minimizing the volume for lagrangian submanifolds of symplectic
manifolds. This theory provides an approach to constructing special lagrangian
submanifolds of Kahler-Einstein manifolds. The second problem is the study of
harmonic maps which are equivariant with respect to general isometric actions of
discrete groups on spaces of nonpositive curvature. This theory may be applied
to study many general rigidity questions for both finite and infinite
dimensional representations of discrete groups. The third problem concerns the
variational problem for Einstein metrics, where the problem is to compute the
Yamabe invariant in more generality, and to show that standard metrics achieve
this min-max variational characterization. Minimization problems occur in many
branches of mathematics and science. For example, linear programming concerns
the problem of minimizing a function (such as cost) subject to a set of
constraint inequalities, problems of navigation involve finding paths of least
length on the earth's surface, and in continuum mechanics, the equilibrium
position of an elastic membrane is determined among the infinitely many possible
positions by the condition that the potential energy be as small as possible.
This proposal deals with certain geometric variational problems, of which the
first is the problem of minimizing a potential energy for mappings subject to
the constraint that the mappings preserve the area. Such problems arise in
nonlinear elasticity where the mapping represents the deformation of an elastic
body. The problems also arise in geometry where one can use such minimizing
configurations to understand complicated geometric spaces that arise in string
theory (physics). The second part of this proposal deals with maps which
minimize a potential energy subject to the conditi on that they are symmetric
for a complicated symmetry group. For example, if you consider the curve of
least length which surrounds a given area, you get a circle, while if you choose
curves which surround regions whose translates (under a fixed symmetry group)
fill up the plane, then the solution is typically a special type of hexagon (the
regular hexagon of the honeycomb if the symmetry group is chosen suitably). The
main goal is to use the symmetric minimizing maps to understand the possible
symmetry groups and how they can arise in important geometric situations. The
final part of the proposal deals with equilibrium solutions of the Einstein
equations of General Relativity. The full Einstein equations may be thought of
as describing the vibrations of the gravitational field which determines the
geometry of spacetime. The corresponding equilibrium problem is important in
geometry, and the third part of the proposal deals with the question of the
extent to which equilibrium solutions can be expected to minimize the potential
energy.
