
* 9803566
* Research in Lorentzian Geometry and Mathematical Relativity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/1998,06/30/1998
* Gregory Galloway,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2001
* USD 62,334.00

Abstract

Proposal: DMS-9803566 Principal Investigator: Gregory Galloway

Research under this award will be conducted in the fields of Lorentzian geometry
and mathematical relativity. One of the central aims of the proposed research is
to develop new techniques for studying spacetime rigidity phenomena. The
proposed research seeks to establish maximum principles for null hypersurfaces
and use these to obtain splitting theorems/rigidity results for spacetimes which
contain null lines. Problems in the theory of black holes are also to be
investigated. These new techniques for studying null hypersurfaces will make
amenable the problem of rigorously establishing under natural regularity
assumptions Hawking's black hole area theorem. The investigator will also
continue research on topological censorship and its relationship to the topology
of black holes, focusing on the connection between asymptotic structure and
black hole topology.

In more general terms, this research project is concerned with achieving a
better understanding of the structure of the spacetime universe at both the
cosmological scale and the scale of collapsing stars. The aim of spacetime
geometry, as to be utilized and developed in this project, is to study the
relationship between three fundamental aspects of the spacetime universe:
curvature (which by the Einstein equations is generated by the presence of
matter), topology (i.e., the global shape of spacetime) and causal structure
(i.e., the behavior of light cones). This research has applications to general
relativity and gravitation theory.


