
* 9970549
* Some Problems for Bi-Harmonic Maps, Blow-Up Analysis for Some Variational Problems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/1999,07/21/1999
* Changyou Wang,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 10/20/1999
* USD 58,134.00



Award: DMS-9970549 Principal Investigator: Changyou Wang

Works on this project concerns several analytic problems arising from the area
of geometric variational calculus. It contains three parts. In the first part,
we try to study problems related to critical points (or bi-harmonic maps) for
Hessian energy functionals of maps between manifolds, such as partial regularity
for minimizing bi-harmonic maps, existence of bi-harmonic map representations
among homotopy classes from four dimensional manifolds, and heat evolutions of
bi-harmonic maps from four dimensional domains. In the second part, we try to
develop blow-up analysis for flows of stationary harmonic maps, flows of
Ginzburg-Landau systems, stable-stationary harmonic maps, and energy
concentrations and bubbling phenomena for entire solutions to harmonic maps in
three dimensional Euclidean space. Here we try to use geometric measure theory
and PDE to understand the defect measures associated with these objects. In the
last part, the PI propose to study lower bound for p-energy and its applications
to possible dynamics of singularity for p-harmonic map flows from two
dimensional domains to the circle, as p tends to two. We hope to build
connections to vortex dynamics of complex Ginzburg-Landau equations in two
dimension.

Nonlinear partial differential equations are basic tools to describe problems
arising from both differential geometry and physics. Harmonic maps model optimal
objects with respect to physically natural energy functionals in families of
objects satisfying common constraints. Heat flows of harmonic maps study the
long-time dynamical behavior of objects in such families. The study will enhance
our understanding of these maps, improve methods to control the singular sets,
and predict singular behavior of solutions to these problems. Bi-harmonic maps
are natural in the study of both fourth order nonlinear PDE and higher
dimensional conformal geometry. Results here will have potential applications to
differential geometry, material science including liquid crystals,
elasticity/plasticity, and fluid mechanics.
