
* 9971202
* Non-Linear Aspects of the Geometry of Convex Sets
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/1999,07/30/1999
* Paul Goodey,OK,University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2002
* USD 54,276.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-9971202 Principal Investigator: Paul Goodey and Marilyn Breen

Marilyn Breen will continue her work on visibility problems in Euclidean space.
These will focus on Helly-type theorems and are aimed at determining whether or
not a set is starshaped. A major objective is to extend Krasnosel'skii's theorem
beyond the setting of compact sets. Paul Goodey's work will focus on the
determination of high dimensional geometric information from low dimensional
data. This data usually arises from sections or projections of the high
dimensional object. In recent years some surprising connections between
projections and sections have emerged. He will try to find further connections
and to obtain a systematic explanation of these phenomena. It is anticipated
that the techniques to be used will be drawn from harmonic analysis, group
representation theory and classical convex geometry.

The geometric questions to be considered under this grant have applications in
quite diverse areas. At a purely geometric level, the study of visibility
questions is connected with robotics. Helly-type theorems have been shown to
have significance for geometric optimization algorithms. In fact, Helly numbers
determine bounds for the speed at which certain algorithms proceed.
Reconstruction of objects from low dimensional data lies at the heart of
stereology and tomography. The study of sections, in this context, amounts to
studying slices of the object under consideration. The ability to obtain
information about the original object from these slices has implications
throughout geosciences and in medical research, for example. Projections of
objects are synonymous with X-rays. Some of the projects to be addressed will
have implications for the reconstruction of objects from their X-rays and for
the design of efficient algorithms to achieve such reconstruction.
