
* 9971505
* Poisson Geometry and Riemannian Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/1999,03/20/2001
* Alan Weinstein,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2003
* USD 345,684.00

Alan Weinstein
---------------------------------------------------------------------- ABSTRACT
OF PROJECT: POISSON GEOMETRY AND QUANTIZATION Principal Investigator: Alan
Weinstein

Poisson structures are the ``shadow of quantum noncommutativity'' on
differentiable manifolds, manifested as singular foliations with symplectic
structures along the leaves. Weinstein will investigate several aspects of
Poisson geometry and its relations to noncommutative algebra. The central part
of the project, motivated by the study of convexity theorems in symplectic and
Poisson geometry, actually belongs to riemannian geometry. Versions of Ulam's
``general stability problem'' concerning approximate homomorphisms from groups
and approximately invariant submanifolds for compact group actions have been
reduced to averaging problems for families of submanifolds. Several methods of
averaging will be investigated. The averaging methods will then be applied to
the classification of proper Lie groupoids, with applications to convexity
theory and isoparametric submanifold geometry. A separate part of the project
will use the geometry and quantization of Dirac structures (singular foliations
with presymplectic structures along the leaves), to complete the classification
of quantum tori up to Morita equivalence.

This project is concerned with various extensions of the notions of symmetry and
symmetry group. Initially, one thinks of a symmetry of a physical or
mathematical object as a transformation which leaves the structure of the object
invariant. The collection of symmetries of a given object, together with the
operation of applying one symmetry after another, forms a "symmetry group" whose
analysis aids the study of the object under investigation. Many important
applications require generalizations of the notion of symmetry group, and even
the notion of symmetry itself. First of all, one has symmetries defined only on
part of an object (e.g. between individual molecules in a complex compound,
rather) or symmetries which leave the properties of an object only approximately
invariant (e.g. in the study of real data, whose symmetries are generally
imperfect). Through a method of averaging, we intend to derive true symmetries
from imperfect ones; this idealization could reveal the underlying structure of
an object despite our imperfect perception of it. The method of averaging may
also be applicable to problems in computer graphics, such as the "morphing" of
one curve or surface into another by a continuous family of curves or surfaces.
Part of the project involves algebraic systems related to those in which the
usual associative law of composition: (ab)c = a(bc) is satisfied only
approximately. Such systems have recently been shown relevant to the
hypothetical "M-theory" which may unravel some of the mysteries of high-energy
physics.
