
* 9972094
* Intrinsic and extrinsic integral geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/1999,07/27/1999
* Joseph H. Fu,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2002
* USD 107,810.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-9972094 Principal Investigator: Joseph H.G. Fu

We propose to study the geometry of certain singular spaces, whose curvatures
are naturally defined as measures. The curvatures under consideration are those
arising in the Steiner-Weyl tube formula. For smooth spaces these quantities are
curvature integrals. For singular spaces they are the total variations of
certain signed measures which may be regarded as generalized curvatures. In all
known cases these curvature measures, which are a priori defined with respect to
an embedding of the singular space in Euclidean space, are in fact computable
solely from the intrinsic metric structure of the space. Our general goal is to
understand and extend this phenomenon. This problem was attacked independently
by Alexandrov and by Federer in the 1950s. Alexandrov's approach was intrinsic
but limited to 2 dimensions, while Federer's theory dealt with embedded objects
of general dimension. Further progress will depend on the reconciliation of
these two methods. We propose that the technical key is based on the use of the
geometric measure theory of currents. The starting point is the fact that
Federer's theory may be recast in the following terms: to certain singular
subspaces X in euclidean space there is an associated integral current N(X) in
the sphere bundle of the ambient space. This current satisfies the Legendre
condition (i.e. it annihilates the differential ideal generated by the canonical
1-form) and is determined by its relation with the Morse theory of X. The
curvature measures of X are then computable in a canonical way from N(X). Our
proposal is based on recent work of the proposer using the current theoretic
framework, showing that Alexandrov's theory may be understood in similar terms.
This suggests the possibility of generalizing the intrinsic approach to higher
dimensions.

In ordinary terms, this project aims to develop a mathematical language adequate
to describe geometrical forms we encounter every day: for example, the
crumplings of a sheet of paper or the surface of a rock. Even though geometrical
shapes typically found in nature tend to be rough ("singular"), for technical
reasons geometry as it has developed historically restricts its attention to
smooth objects. Our goal is to be able to deal mathematically with such objects
without imposing such unrealistic assumptions. We expect that this work will
eventually have a technological impact, in such areas as computer visualization
and the study of buckling of sheets (as of a car fender during a collision).
